The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Homeric Hymns, by Andrew Lang


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Homeric Hymns
       A New Prose Translation; and Essays, Literary and Mythological


Author: Andrew Lang



Release Date: July 20, 2005  [eBook #16338]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOMERIC HYMNS***





Transcribed from the 1899 George Allen edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





THE HOMERIC HYMNS
A NEW PROSE TRANSLATION
AND ESSAYS, LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL,
by Andrew Lang


[Bust of Athene.  Forming a vase; found at Athens now in the British
Museum.  (Fifth Century B.C.): langi.jpg]




DEDICATION


To Henry Butcher
A Little Token of
A Long Friendship




PREFACE


To translate the Hymns usually called "Homeric" had long been my wish,
and, at the Publisher's suggestion, I undertook the work.  Though not in
partnership, on this occasion, with my friend, Mr. Henry Butcher
(Professor of Greek in the University of Edinburgh), I have been
fortunate in receiving his kind assistance in correcting the proofs of
the longer and most of the minor Hymns.  Mr. Burnet, Professor of Greek
in the University of St. Andrews, has also most generously read the
proofs of the translation.  It is, of course, to be understood that these
scholars are not responsible for the slips which may have wandered into
my version, the work of one whose Greek has long "rusted in disuse."
Indeed I must confess that the rendering "Etin" for [Greek text] is
retained in spite of Mr. Butcher, who is also not wholly satisfied with
"gledes of light," and with "shieling" for a pastoral summer station in
the hills.  But I know no word for it in English south of Tweed.

Mr. A. S. Murray, the Head of the Classical Department in the British
Museum, has also been good enough to read, and suggest corrections in the
preliminary Essays; while Mr. Cecil Smith, of the British Museum, has
obligingly aided in selecting the works of art here reproduced.

The text of the Hymns is well known to be corrupt, in places impossible,
and much mended by conjecture.  I have usually followed Gemoll (_Die
Homerischen Hymnen_, Leipzig, 1886), but have sometimes preferred a MS.
reading, or emendations by Mr. Tyrrell, by Mr. Verral, or the admirable
suggestions of Mr. Allen.  My chief object has been to find, in cases of
doubt, the phrases least unworthy of the poets.  Too often it is
impossible to be certain as to what they really wrote.

I have had beside me the excellent prose translation by Mr. John Edgar
(Thin, Edinburgh, 1891).  As is inevitable, we do not always agree in the
sense of certain phrases, but I am far from claiming superiority for my
own attempts.

The method employed in the Essays, the anthropological method of
interpreting beliefs and rites, is still, of course, on its trial.  What
can best be said as to its infirmities, and the dangers of its abuse, and
of system-making in the present state of the evidence, will be found in
Sir Alfred Lyall's "Asiatic Studies," vol. ii. chaps. iii. and iv.
Readers inclined to pursue the subject should read Mr. L. R. Farnell's
"Cults of the Greek States" (Clarendon Press, 1896), Mr. J. G. Frazer's
"Golden Bough," his "Pausanias," and Mr. Hartland's work on "The Myth of
Perseus."  These books, it must be observed, are by no means always in
agreement with my own provisional theories.




ESSAYS INTRODUCTORY


THE SO-CALLED HOMERIC HYMNS


"The existing collection of the Hymns is of unknown editorship, unknown
date, and unknown purpose," says Baumeister.  Why any man should have
collected the little preludes of five or six lines in length, and of
purely conventional character, while he did not copy out the longer poems
to which they probably served as preludes, is a mystery.  The celebrated
Wolf, who opened the path which leads modern Homerologists to such an
extraordinary number of divergent theories, thought rightly that the
great Alexandrian critics before the Christian Era, did not recognise the
Hymns as "Homeric."  They did not employ the Hymns as illustrations of
Homeric problems; though it is certain that they knew the Hymns, for one
collection did exist in the third century B.C. {4}  Diodorus and
Pausanias, later, also cite "the poet in the Hymns," "Homer in the
Hymns"; and the pseudo-Herodotus ascribes the Hymns to Homer in his Life
of that author.  Thucydides, in the Periclean age, regards Homer as the
blind Chian minstrel who composed the Hymn to the Delian Apollo: a good
proof of the relative antiquity of that piece, but not evidence, of
course, that our whole collection was then regarded as Homeric.
Baumeister agrees with Wolf that the brief Hymns were recited by
rhapsodists as preludes to the recitation of Homeric or other cantos.
Thus, in Hymn xxxi. 18, the poet says that he is going on to chant "the
renowns of men half divine."  Other preludes end with a prayer to the God
for luck in the competition of reciters.

This, then, is the plausible explanation of most of the brief Hymns--they
were preludes to epic recitations--but the question as to the long
narrative Hymns with which the collection opens is different.  These were
themselves rhapsodies recited at Delphi, at Delos, perhaps in Cyprus (the
long Hymn to Aphrodite), in Athens (as the Hymn to Pan, who was friendly
in the Persian invasion), and so forth.  That the Pisistratidae organised
Homeric recitations at Athens is certain enough, and Baumeister suspects,
in xiv., xxiii., xxx., xxxi., xxxii., the hand of Onomacritus, the forger
of Oracles, that strange accomplice of the Pisistratidae.  The Hymn to
Aphrodite is just such a lay as the Phaeacian minstrel sang at the feast
of Alcinous, in the hearing of Odysseus.  Finally Baumeister supposes our
collection not to have been made by learned editors, like Aristarchus and
Zenodotus, but committed confusedly from memory to papyrus by some
amateur.  The conventional attribution of the Hymns to Homer, in spite of
linguistic objections, and of many allusions to things unknown or
unfamiliar in the Epics, is merely the result of the tendency to set down
"masterless" compositions to a well-known name.  Anything of epic
characteristics was allotted to the master of Epic.  In the same way an
unfathered joke of Lockhart's was attributed to Sydney Smith, and the
process is constantly illustrated in daily conversation.  The word [Greek
text], hymn, had not originally a religious sense: it merely meant a lay.
Nobody calls the Theocritean idylls on Heracles and the Dioscuri "hymns,"
but they are quite as much "hymns" (in our sense) as the "hymn" on
Aphrodite, or on Hermes.

To the English reader familiar with the Iliad and Odyssey the Hymns must
appear disappointing, if he come to them with an expectation of
discovering merits like those of the immortal epics.  He will not find
that they stand to the Iliad as Milton's "Ode to the Nativity" stands to
"Paradise Lost."  There is in the Hymns, in fact, no scope for the epic
knowledge of human nature in every mood and aspect.  We are not so much
interested in the Homeric Gods as in the Homeric mortals, yet the Hymns
are chiefly concerned not with men, but with Gods and their mythical
adventures.  However, the interest of the Hymn to Demeter is perfectly
human, for the Goddess is in sorrow, and is mingling with men.  The Hymn
to Aphrodite, too, is Homeric in its grace, and charm, and divine sense
of human limitations, of old age that comes on the fairest, as Tithonus
and Anchises; of death and disease that wait for all.  The life of the
Gods is one long holiday; the end of our holiday is always near at hand.
The Hymn to Dionysus, representing him as a youth in the fulness of
beauty, is of a charm which was not attainable, while early art
represented the God as a mature man; but literary art, in the Homeric
age, was in advance of sculpture and painting.  The chief merit of the
Delian Hymn is in the concluding description of the assembled Ionians,
happy seafarers like the Phaeacians in the morning of the world.  The
confusions of the Pythian Hymn to Apollo make it less agreeable; and the
humour of the Hymn to Hermes is archaic.  All those pieces, however, have
delightfully fresh descriptions of sea and land, of shadowy dells,
flowering meadows, dusky, fragrant caves; of the mountain glades where
the wild beasts fawn in the train of the winsome Goddess; and the high
still peaks where Pan wanders among the nymphs, and the glens where
Artemis drives the deer, and the spacious halls and airy palaces of the
Immortals.  The Hymns are fragments of the work of a school which had a
great Master and great traditions: they also illustrate many aspects of
Greek religion.

In the essays which follow, the religious aspect of the Hymns is chiefly
dwelt upon: I endeavour to bring out what Greek religion had of human and
sacred, while I try to explain its less majestic features as no less
human: as derived from the earliest attempts at speculation and at
mastering the secrets of the world.  In these chapters regions are
visited which scholars have usually neglected or ignored.  It may seem
strange to seek the origins of Apollo, and of the renowned Eleusinian
Mysteries, in the tales and rites of the Bora and the Nanga; in the
beliefs and practices of Pawnees and Larrakeah, Yao and Khond.  But these
tribes, too, are human, and what they now or lately were, the remote
ancestors of the Greeks must once have been.  All races have sought
explanations of their own ritual in the adventures of the Dream Time, the
_Alcheringa_, when beings of a more potent race, Gods or Heroes, were on
earth, and achieved and endured such things as the rites commemorate.  And
the things thus endured and achieved, as I try to show, are everywhere of
much the same nature; whether they are now commemorated by painted
savages in the Bora or the Medicine Dance, or whether they were exhibited
and proclaimed by the Eumolpidae in a splendid hall, to the pious of
Hellas and of Rome.  My attempt may seem audacious, and to many scholars
may even be repugnant; but it is on these lines, I venture to think, that
the darker problems of Greek religion and rite must be approached.  They
are all survivals, however fairly draped and adorned by the unique genius
of the most divinely gifted race of mankind.

The method of translation is that adopted by Professor Butcher and myself
in the Odyssey, and by me in a version of Theocritus, as well as by Mr.
Ernest Myers, who preceded us, in his Pindar.  That method has lately
been censured and, like all methods, is open to objection.  But I confess
that neither criticism nor example has converted me to the use of modern
colloquial English, and I trust that my persistence in using poetical
English words in the translation of Greek poetry will not greatly offend.
I cannot render a speech of Anchises thus:--

   "If you really are merely a mortal, and if a woman of the normal kind
   was your mother, while your father (as you lay it down) was the well-
   known Otreus, and if you come here all through an undying person,
   Hermes; and if you are to be known henceforward as my wife,--why, then
   nobody, mortal or immortal, shall interfere with my intention to take
   instant advantage of the situation."

That kind of speech, though certainly long-winded, may be the manner in
which a contemporary pastoralist would address a Goddess "in a coming on
humour."  But the situation does not occur in the prose of our existence,
and I must prefer to translate the poet in a manner more congenial, if
less up to date.  For one rare word "Etin" ([Greek text]) I must
apologise: it seems to me to express the vagueness of the unfamiliar
monster, and is old Scots, as in the tale of "The Red Etin of Ireland."



THE HYMN TO APOLLO


The Hymn to Apollo presents innumerable difficulties, both of text, which
is very corrupt, and as to the whole nature and aim of the composition.
In this version it is divided into two portions, the first dealing with
the birth of Apollo, and the foundation of his shrine in the isle of
Delos; the second concerned with the establishment of his Oracle and fane
at Delphi.  The division is made merely to lighten the considerable
strain on the attention of the English reader.  I have no pretensions to
decide whether the second portion was by the author of the first, or is
an imitation by another hand, or is contemporary, or a later addition, or
a mere compilation from several sources.  The first part seems to find a
natural conclusion, about lines 176-181.  The blind singer (who is quoted
here by Thucydides) appears at that point to say farewell to his
cherished Ionian audience.  What follows, in our second part, appeals to
hearers interested in the Apollo of Crisa, and of the Delphian temple:
the _Pythian_ Apollo.

According to a highly ingenious, but scarcely persuasive theory of Mr.
Verrall's, this interest is unfriendly. {13}  Our second part is no hymn
at all, but a sequel tacked on for political purposes only: and valuable
for these purposes because so tacked on.

From line 207 to the end we have this sequel, the story of Apollo's
dealings as Delphinian, and as Pythian; all this following on detached
fragments of enigmatic character, and containing also (305-355) the
intercalated myth about the birth of Typhaon from Hera's anger.  In the
politically inspired sequel there is, according to Mr. Verrall, no living
zeal for the honour of Pytho (Delphi).  The threat of the God to his
Cretan ministers,--"Beware of arrogance, or . . . "--must be a prophecy
after the event.  Now such an event occurred, early in the sixth century,
when the Crisaeans were supplanted by the people of the town that had
grown up round the Oracle at Delphi.  In them, and in the Oracle under
their management, the poet shows no interest (Mr. Verrall thinks), none
in the many mystic peculiarities of the shrine.  It is quite in
contradiction with Delphian tradition to represent, as the Hymn does,
Trophonius and Agamedes as the _original_ builders.

Many other points are noted--such as the derivation of "Pytho" from a
word meaning _rot_,--to show that the hymnist was rather disparaging than
celebrating the Delphian sanctuary.  Taking the Hymn as a whole, more is
done for Delos in three lines, says Mr. Verrall, than for Pytho or Delphi
in three hundred.  As a whole, the spirit of the piece is much more
Delian (Ionian) than Delphic.  So Mr. Verrall regards the _Cento_ as "a
religious pasquinade against the sanctuary on Parnassus," a pasquinade
emanating from Athens, under the Pisistratidae, who, being Ionian
leaders, had a grudge against "the Dorian Delphi," "a comparatively
modern, unlucky, and from the first unsatisfactory" institution.
Athenians are interested in the "far-seen" altar of the seaman's Dolphin
God on the shore, rather than in his inland Pythian habitation.

All this, with much more, is decidedly ingenious.  If accepted it might
lead the way to a general attack on the epics, as _tendenz_ pieces, works
with a political purpose, or doctored for a political purpose.  But how
are we to understand the uses of the pasquinade Hymn?  Was it published,
so to speak, to amuse and aid the Pisistratidae?  Does such remote
antiquity show us any examples of such handling of sacred things in
poetry?  Might we not argue that Apollo's threat to the Crisaeans was
meant by the poet as a friendly warning, and is prior to the fall of
Crisa?  One is reminded of the futile ingenuity with which German
critics, following their favourite method, have analysed the fatal Casket
Letters of Mary Stuart into letters to her husband, Darnley; or to
Murray; or by Darnley to Mary, with scraps of her diary, and false
interpolations.  The enemies of the Queen, coming into possession of her
papers after the affair of Carberry Hill, falsified the Casket Letters
into their present appearance of unity.  Of course historical facts make
this ingenuity unavailing.  We regret the circumstance in the interest of
the Queen's reputation, but welcome these illustrative examples of what
can be done in Germany. {16a}

Fortunately all Teutons are not so ingenious.  Baumeister has fallen on
those who, in place of two hymns, Delian and Pythian, to Apollo, offer us
half-a-dozen fragments.  By presenting an array of discordant conjectures
as to the number and nature of these scraps, he demonstrates the purely
wilful and arbitrary nature of the critical method employed. {16b}  Thus
one learned person believes in (1) two perfect little poems; (2) two
larger hymns; (3) three lacerated fragments of hymns, one lacking its
beginning, the other wofully deprived of its end.  Another _savant_
detects no less than eight fragments, with interpolations; though perhaps
no biblical critic _ejusdem farinae_ has yet detected eight Isaiahs.
There are about ten other theories of similar plausibility and value.
Meanwhile Baumeister argues that the Pythian Hymn (our second part) is an
imitation of the Delian; by a follower, not of Homer, but of Hesiod.
Thus, the Hesiodic school was closely connected with Delphi; the Homeric
with Ionia, so that Delphi rarely occurs in the Epics; in fact only
thrice (I. 405, [Greek text]. 80, [Greek text]. 581).  The local
knowledge is accurate (Pythian Hymn, 103 _sqq_.).  These are local
legends, and knowledge of the curious chariot ritual of Onchestus.  The
Muses are united with the Graces as in a work of art in the Delphian
temple.  The poet chooses the Hesiodic and un-Homeric myth of Heaven and
Earth, and their progeny: a myth current also in Polynesia, Australia,
and New Zealand.  The poet is full of inquiry as to origins, even
etymological, as is Hesiod.  Like Hesiod (and Mr. Max Muller), _origines
rerum ex nominibus explicat_.  Finally, the second poet (and here every
one must agree) is a much worse poet than the first.  As for the
prophetic word of warning to the Crisaeans and its fulfilment, Baumeister
urges that the people of Cirrha, the seaport, not of Crisa, were
punished, in Olympiad 47 (Grote, ii. 374).

Turning to Gemoll, we find him maintaining that the two parts were in
ancient times regarded as one hymn in the age of Aristophanes. {18}  If
so, we can only reply, if we agree with Baumeister, that in the age of
Aristophanes, or earlier, there was a plentiful lack of critical
discrimination.  As to Baumeister's theory that the second part is
Hesiodic, Gemoll finds a Hesiodic reminiscence in the first part (line
121), while there are Homeric reminiscences in the second part.

Thus do the learned differ among themselves, and an ordinary reader feels
tempted to rely on his own literary taste.

According to that criterion, I think we probably have in the Hymn the
work of a good poet, in the early part; and in the latter part, or second
Hymn, the work of a bad poet, selecting unmanageable passages of myth,
and handling them pedantically and ill.  At all events we have here work
visibly third rate, which cannot be said, in my poor opinion, about the
immense mass of the Iliad and Odyssey.  The great Alexandrian critics did
not use the Hymns as illustrative material in their discussion of Homer.
Their instinct was correct, and we must not start the consideration of
the Homeric question from these much neglected pieces.  We must not study
_obscurum per obscurius_.  The genius of the Epic soars high above such
myths as those about Pytho, Typhaon, and the Apollo who is alternately a
dolphin and a meteor: soars high above pedantry and bad etymology.  In
the Epics we breathe a purer air.

Descending, as it did, from the mythology of savages, the mythic store of
Greece was rich in legends such as we find among the lowest races.  Homer
usually ignores them: Hesiod and the authors of the Hymns are less noble
in their selections.

For this reason and for many others, we regard the Hymns, on the whole,
as post-Homeric, while their collector, by inserting the Hymn to Ares,
shows little proof of discrimination.  Only the methods of modern German
scholars, such as Wilamowitz Mollendorf, and of Englishmen like Mr.
Walter Leaf, can find in the Epics marks of such confusion, dislocation,
and interpolations as confront us in the Hymn to Apollo.  (I may refer to
my work, "Homer and the Epic," for a defence of the unity of Iliad and
Odyssey.)  For example, Mr. Verrall certainly makes it highly probable
that the Pythian Hymn, at least in its concluding words of the God, is
not earlier than the sixth century.  But no proof of anything like this
force is brought against the antiquity of the Iliad or Odyssey.

As to the myths in the Hymns, I would naturally study them from the
standpoint of anthropology, and in the light of comparison of the legends
of much more backward peoples than the Greeks.  But that light at present
is for me broken and confused.

I have been led to conclusions varying from those of such students as Mr.
Tylor and Mr. Spencer, and these conclusions should be stated, before
they are applied to the Myth of Apollo.  I am not inclined, like them, to
accept "Animism," or "The Ghost Theory," as the master-key to the
_origin_ of religion, though Animism is a great tributary stream.  To
myself it now appears that among the lowest known races we find present a
fluid mass of beliefs both high and low, from the belief in a moral
creative being, a judge of men, to the pettiest fable which envisages him
as a medicine-man, or even as a beast or bird.  In my opinion the higher
belief may very well be the earlier.  While I can discern the processes
by which the lower myths were evolved, and were attached to a worthier
pre-existing creed, I cannot see how, if the lower faiths came first, the
higher faith was ever evolved out of _them_ by very backward savages.

On the other side, in the case of Australia, Mr. Tylor writes: "For a
long time after Captain Cook's visit, the information as to native
religious ideas is of the scantiest."  This was inevitable, for our
information has only been obtained with the utmost difficulty, and under
promises of secrecy, by later inquirers who had entirely won the
confidence of the natives, and had been initiated into their Mysteries.
Mr. Tylor goes on in the same sentence: "But, since the period of
European colonists and missionaries, a crowd of alleged native names for
the Supreme Deity and a great Evil Deity have been recorded, which, if
really of native origin, would show the despised black fellow as in
possession of theological generalisations as to the formation and
conservation of the universe, and the nature of good and evil, comparable
with those of his white supplanter in the land." {23a}  Mr. Tylor then
proceeds to argue that these ideas have been borrowed from missionaries.
I have tried to reply to this argument by proving, for example, that the
name of Baiame, one of these deities, could not have been borrowed (as
Mr. Tylor seems inclined to hold) from a missionary tract published
sixteen years after we first hear of Baiame, who, again, was certainly
dominant before the arrival of missionaries.  I have adduced other
arguments of the same tendency, and I will add that the earliest English
explorers and missionaries in Virginia and New England (1586-1622) report
from America beliefs absolutely parallel in many ways to the creeds now
reported from Australia.  Among these notions are "ideas of moral
judgment and retribution after death," which in Australia Mr. Tylor marks
as "imported." {23b}  In my opinion the certainty that the beliefs in
America were not imported, is another strong argument for their native
character, when they are found with such striking resemblances among the
very undeveloped savages of Australia.

Savages, Mr. Hartland says in a censure of my theory, are "guiltless" of
Christian teaching. {24}  If Mr. Hartland is right, Mr. Tylor is wrong;
the ideas, whatever else they are, are unimported, yet, _teste_ Mr.
Tylor, the ideas are comparable with those of the black man's white
supplanters.  I would scarcely go so far.  If we take, however, the best
ideas attributed to the blacks, and hold them disengaged from the
accretion of puerile fables with which they are overrun, then there are
discovered notions of high religious value, undeniably analogous to some
Christian dogmas.  But the sanction of the Australian gods is as
powerfully lent to silly, or cruel, or needless ritual, as to some moral
ideas of weight and merit.  In brief, as far as I am able to see, all
sorts of ideas, the lowest and the highest, are held at once confusedly
by savages, and the same confusion survives in ancient Greek belief.  As
far back as we can trace him, man had a wealth of religious and mythical
conceptions to choose from, and different peoples, as they advanced in
civilisation, gave special prominence to different elements in the primal
stock of beliefs.  The choice of Israel was unique: Greece retained far
more of the lower ancient ideas, but gave to them a beauty of grace and
form which is found among no other race.

If this view be admitted for the moment, and for the argument's sake, we
may ask how it applies to the myths of Apollo.  Among the ideas which
even now prevail among the backward peoples still in the neolithic stage
of culture, we may select a few conceptions.  There is the conception of
a great primal anthropomorphic Being, who was in the beginning, or, at
least, about whose beginning legend is silent.  He made all things, he
existed on earth (in some cases), teaching men the arts of life and rules
of conduct, social and moral.  In those instances he retired from earth,
and now dwells on high, still concerned with the behaviour of the tribes.

This is a lofty conception, but it is entangled with a different set of
legends.  This primal Being is mixed up with strange persons of a race
earlier than man, half human, half bestial.  Many things, in some cases
almost all things, are mythically regarded, not as created, but as the
results of adventures and metamorphoses among the members of this
original race.  Now in New Zealand, Polynesia, Greece, and elsewhere, but
not, to my knowledge, in the very most backward peoples, the place of
this original race, "Old, old Ones," is filled by great natural objects,
Earth, Sky, Sea, Forests, regarded as beings of human parts and passions.

The present universe is mythically arranged in regard to their early
adventures: the separation of sky and earth, and so forth.  Where this
belief prevails we find little or no trace of the primal maker and
master, though we do find strange early metaphysics of curiously abstract
quality (Maoris, Zunis, Polynesians).  As far as our knowledge goes,
Greek mythology springs partly from this stratum of barbaric as opposed
to strictly savage thought.  Ouranos and Gaea, Cronos, and the Titans
represent the primal beings who have their counterpart in Maori and Wintu
legend.  But these, in the Greece of the Epics and Hesiod, have long been
subordinated to Zeus and the Olympians, who are envisaged as triumphant
gods of a younger generation.  There is no Creator; but Zeus--how, we do
not know--has come to be regarded as a Being relatively Supreme, and as,
on occasion, the guardian of morality.  Of course his conduct, in myth,
is represented as a constant violation of the very rules of life which he
expects mankind to observe.  I am disposed to look on this essential
contradiction as the result of a series of mythical accretions on an
original conception of Zeus in his higher capacity.  We can see how the
accretions arose.  Man never lived consistently on the level of his best
original ideas: savages also have endless myths of Baiame or Daramulun,
or Bunjil, in which these personages, though interested in human
behaviour, are puerile, cruel, absurd, lustful, and so on.  Man will
sport thus with his noblest intuitions.

In the same way, in Christian Europe, we may contrast Dunbar's pious
"Ballat of Our Lady" with his "Kynd Kittok," in which God has his eye on
the soul of an intemperate ale-wife who has crept into Paradise.  "God
lukit, and saw her lattin in, and leugh His heart sair."  Examples of
this kind of sportive irreverence are common enough; their root is in
human nature: and they could not be absent in the mythology of savage or
of ancient peoples.  To Zeus the myths of this kind would come to be
attached in several ways.

As a nature-god of the Heaven he marries the Earth.  The tendency of men
being to claim descent from a God, for each family with this claim a myth
of a separate divine amour was needed.  Where there had existed Totemism,
or belief in kinship with beasts, the myth of the amour of a wolf, bull,
serpent, swan, and so forth, was attached to the legend of Zeus.  Zeus
had been that swan, serpent, wolf, or bull.  Once more, ritual arose, in
great part, from the rites of sympathetic magic.

This or that mummery was enacted by men for a magical purpose, to secure
success in the chase, agriculture, or war.  When the performers asked,
"Why do we do thus and thus?" the answer was, "Zeus first did so," or
Demeter, or Apollo did so, on a certain occasion.  About that occasion a
myth was framed, and finally there was no profligacy, cruelty, or
absurdity of which the God was not guilty.  Yet, all the time, he
punished adultery, inhospitality, perjury, incest, cannibalism, and other
excesses, of which, in legend, he was always setting the example.  We
know from Xenophanes, Plato, and St. Augustine how men's consciences were
tormented by this unceasing contradiction: this overgrowth of myth on the
stock of an idea originally noble.  It is thus that I would attempt to
account for the contradictory conceptions of Zeus, for example.

As to Apollo, I do not think that mythologists determined to find, in
Apollo, some deified aspect of Nature, have laid stress enough on his
counterparts in savage myth.  We constantly find, in America, in the
Andaman Isles, and in Australia, that, subordinate to the primal Being,
there exists another who enters into much closer relations with mankind.
He is often concerned with healing and with prophecy, or with the
inspiration of conjurers or shamans.  Sometimes he is merely an
underling, as in the case of the Massachusetts Kiehtan, and his more
familiar subordinate, Hobamoc. {30}  But frequently this go-between of
God and Man is (like Apollo) the _Son_ of the primal Being (often an
unbegotten Son) or his Messenger (Andaman, Noongaburrah, Kurnai,
Kamilaroi, and other Australian tribes).  He reports to the somewhat
otiose primal Being about men's conduct, and he sometimes superintends
the Mysteries.  I am disposed to regard the prophetic and oracular Apollo
(who, as the Hymn to Hermes tells us, alone knows the will of Father
Zeus) as the Greek modification of this personage in savage theology.
Where this Son is found in Australia, I by no means regard him as a
savage refraction from Christian teaching about a mediator, for Christian
teaching, in fact, has not been accepted, least of all by the highly
conservative sorcerers, or shamans, or wirreenuns of the tribes.  European
observers, of course, have been struck by (and have probably exaggerated
in some instances) the Christian analogy.  But if they had been as well
acquainted with ancient Greek as with Christian theology they would have
remarked that the Andaman, American, and Australian "mediators" are
infinitely more akin to Apollo, in his relations with Zeus and with men,
than to any Person about whom missionaries can preach.  But the most
devoted believer in borrowing will not say that, when the Australian
mediator, Tundun, son of Mungun-gnaur, turns into a porpoise, the Kurnai
have borrowed from our Hymn of the Dolphin Apollo.  It is absurd to
maintain that the Son of the God, the go-between of God and men, in
savage theology, is borrowed from missionaries, while this being has so
much more in common with Apollo (from whom he cannot conceivably be
borrowed) than with Christ.  The Tundun-porpoise story seems to have
arisen in gratitude to the porpoise, which drives fishes inshore, for the
natives to catch.  Neither Tharamulun nor Hobamoc (Australian and
American Gods of healing and soothsaying), who appear to men as serpents,
are borrowed from Asclepius, or from the Python of Apollo.  The processes
have been quite different, and in Apollo, the oracular son of Zeus, who
declares his counsel to men, I am apt to see a beautiful Greek
modification of the type of the mediating Son of the primal Being of
savage belief, adorned with many of the attributes of the Sun God, from
whom, however, he is fundamentally distinct.  Apollo, I think, is an
adorned survival of the Son of the God of savage theology.  He was not,
at first, a Nature God, solar or not.  This opinion, if it seems valid,
helps to account, in part, for the animal metamorphoses of Apollo, a
survival from the mental confusion of savagery.  Such a confusion, in
Greece, makes it necessary for the wise son of Zeus to seek information,
as in the Hymn to Hermes, from an old clown.  This medley of ideas, in
the mind of a civilised poet, who believes that Apollo is all-knowing in
the counsels of eternity, is as truly mythological as Dunbar's God who
laughs his heart sore at an ale-house jest.  Dunbar, and the author of
the Hymn, and the savage with his tale of Tundun or Daramulun, have all
quite contradictory sets of ideas alternately present to their minds; the
mediaeval poet, of course, being conscious of the contradiction, which
makes the essence of his humour, such as it is.  To Greece, in its
loftier moods, Apollo was, despite his myth, a noble source of
inspiration, of art, and of conduct.  But the contradiction in the low
myth and high doctrine of Apollo, could never be eradicated under any
influence less potent than that of Christianity. {34}  If this theory of
Apollo's origin be correct, many pages of learned works on Mythology need
to be rewritten.




THE HYMN TO HERMES


[Hermes with the boy Dionysos.  Statue by Praxiteles, found at Olympia:
lang35.jpg]

The Hymn to Hermes is remarkable for the corruption of the text, which
appears even to present _lacunae_.  The English reader will naturally
prefer the lively and charming version of Shelley to any other.  The poet
can tell and adorn the story without visibly floundering in the pitfalls
of a dislocated text.  If we may judge by line 51, and if Greek musical
tradition be correct, the date of the Hymn cannot be earlier than the
fortieth Olympiad.  About that period Terpander is said to have given the
lyre seven strings (as Mercury does in the poem), in place of the
previous four strings.  The date of Terpander is dubious, but probably
the seven-stringed lyre had long been in common use before the poet
attributed the invention to Hermes.  The same argument applies to the
antiquity of writing, assigned by poets as the invention of various
mythical and prehistoric heroes.  But the poets were not careful
archaeologists, and regarded anachronisms as genially as did Shakespeare
or Scott.  Moreover, the fact that Terpander did invent the seven chords
is not beyond dispute historically, while, mythically, Apollo and Amphion
are credited with the idea.  That Hermes invented fire-sticks seems a
fable which robs Prometheus of the honour.  We must not look for any kind
of consistency in myth.

The learned differ as to the precise purpose of the Hymn, and some even
exclude the invention of the _cithara_.  To myself it seems that the poet
chiefly revels in a very familiar subject of savage humour (notably among
the Zulus), the extraordinary feats and tricks of a tiny and apparently
feeble and helpless person or animal, such as Brer Rabbit.  The triumph
of astuteness over strength (a triumph here assigned to the infancy of a
God) is the theme.  Hermes is here a rustic _doublure_ of Apollo, as he
was, in fact, mainly a rural deity, though he became the Messenger of the
Gods, and the Guide of Souls outworn.  In these respects he answers to
the Australian Grogoragally, in his double relation to the Father, Boyma,
and to men living and dead. {37a}

As a go-between of Gods and men, Hermes may be a _doublure_ of Apollo,
but, as the Hymn shows, he aspired in vain to Apollo's oracular function.
In one respect his behaviour has a singular savage parallel.  His shoes
woven of twigs, so as not to show the direction in which he is
proceeding, answer to the equally shapeless feather sandals of the blacks
who "go _Kurdaitcha_," that is, as avengers of blood.  I have nowhere
else found this practice as to the shoes, which, after all, cannot
conceal the direction of the spoor from a native tracker. {37b}  The
trick of driving the cattle backwards answers to the old legend that
Bruce reversed the shoes of his horse when he fled from the court of
Edward I.

The humour of the Hymn is rather rustic: cattle theft is the chief joke,
cattle theft by a baby.  The God, divine as he is, feels his mouth water
for roast beef, a primitive conception.  In fact, throughout this Hymn we
are far from the solemn regard paid to Apollo, from the wistful beauty of
the Hymn to Demeter, and from the gladness and melancholy of the Hymn to
Aphrodite.  Sportive myths are treated sportively, as in the story of
Ares and Aphrodite in the Odyssey.  Myths contained all conceivable
elements, among others that of humour, to which the poet here abandons
himself.  The statues and symbols of Hermes were inviolably sacred; as
Guide of Souls he played the part of comforter and friend: he brought men
all things lucky and fortunate: he made the cattle bring forth
abundantly: he had the golden wand of wealth.  But he was also tricksy as
a Brownie or as Puck; and that fairy aspect of his character and legend,
he being the midnight thief whose maraudings account for the unexplained
disappearances of things, is the chief topic of the gay and reckless
hymn.  Even the Gods, even angry Apollo, are moved to laughter, for over
sport and playfulness, too, Greek religion throws her sanction.  At the
dishonesties of commerce (clearly regarded as a form of theft) Hermes
winks his laughing eyes (line 516).  This is not an early Socialistic
protest against "Commercialism."  The early traders, like the Vikings,
were alternately pirates and hucksters, as opportunity served.  Every
occupation must have its heavenly patron, its departmental deity, and
Hermes protects thieves and raiders, "minions of the moon," "clerks of
St. Nicholas."  His very birth is a stolen thing, the darkling fruit of a
divine amour in a dusky cavern.  _Il chasse de race_. {39}




THE HYMN TO APHRODITE


The Hymn to Aphrodite is, in a literary sense, one of the most beautiful
and quite the most Homeric in the collection.  By "Homeric" I mean that
if we found the adventure of Anchises occurring at length in the Iliad,
by way of an episode, perhaps in a speech of AEneas, it would not strike
us as inconsistent in tone, though occasionally in phrase.  Indeed the
germ of the Hymn occurs in Iliad, B. 820: "AEneas, whom holy Aphrodite
bore to the embraces of Anchises on the knowes of Ida, a Goddess couching
with a mortal."  Again, in E. 313, AEneas is spoken of as the son of
Aphrodite and the neat-herd, Anchises.  The celebrated prophecy of the
future rule of the children of AEneas over the Trojans (Y. 307), probably
made, like many prophecies, after the event, appears to indicate the
claim of a Royal House at Ilios, and is regarded as of later date than
the general context of the epic.  The AEneid is constructed on this hint;
the Romans claiming to be of Trojan descent through AEneas.  The date of
the composition cannot be fixed from considerations of the Homeric tone;
thus lines 238-239 may be a reminiscence of Odyssey, [Greek text]. 394,
and other like suggestions are offered. {41}  The conjectures as to date
vary from the time of Homer to that of the _Cypria_, of Mimnermus (the
references to the bitterness of loveless old age are in his vein) of
Anacreon, or even of Herodotus and the Tragedians.  The words [Greek
text], [Greek text], and other indications are relied on for a late date:
and there are obvious coincidences with the Hymn to Demeter, as in line
174, _Demeter_ 109, f.   Gemoll, however, takes this hymn to be the
earlier.

About the place of composition, Cyprus or Asia Minor, the learned are no
less divided than about the date.  Many of the grounds on which their
opinions rest appear unstable.  The relations of Aphrodite to the wild
beasts under her wondrous spell, for instance, need not be borrowed from
Circe with her attendant beasts.  If not of Homer's age, the Hymn is
markedly successful as a continuation of the Homeric tone and manner.

Modern Puritanism naturally "condemns" Aphrodite, as it "condemns" Helen.
But Homer is lenient; Helen is under the spell of the Gods, an unwilling
and repentant tool of Destiny; and Aphrodite, too, is driven by Zeus into
the arms of a mortal.  She is [Greek text], shamefast; and her adventure
is to her a bitter sorrow (199, 200).  The dread of Anchises--a man is
not long of life who lies with a Goddess--refers to a belief found from
Glenfinlas to Samoa and New Caledonia, that the embraces of the spiritual
ladies of the woodlands are fatal to men.  The legend has been told to me
in the Highlands, and to Mr. Stevenson in Samoa, while my cousin, Mr. J.
J. Atkinson, actually knew a Kaneka who died in three days after an amour
like that of Anchises.  The Breton ballad, _Le Sieur Nan_, turns on the
same opinion.  The amour of Thomas the Rhymer is a mediaeval analogue of
the Idaean legend.

Aphrodite has better claims than most Greek Gods to Oriental elements.
Herodotus and Pausanias (i. xiv. 6, iii. 23, I) look on her as a being
first worshipped by the Assyrians, then by the Paphians of Cyprus, and
Phoenicians at Askelon, who communicated the cult to the Cythereans.
Cyprus is one of her most ancient sites, and Ishtar and Ashtoreth are
among her Oriental analogues.  She springs from the sea--

   "The wandering waters knew her, the winds and the viewless ways,
   And the roses grew rosier, and bluer the sea-blue streams of the
   bays."

But the charm of Aphrodite is Greek.  Even without foreign influence,
Greek polytheism would have developed a Goddess of Love, as did the
polytheism of the North (Frigga) and of the Aztecs.  The rites of Adonis,
the vernal year, are, even in the name of the hero, Oriental.  "The name
Adonis is the Phoenician _Adon_, 'Lord.'" {44}  "The decay and revival of
vegetation" inspires the Adonis rite, which is un-Homeric; and was
superfluous, where the descent and return of Persephone typified the same
class of ideas.  To whatever extent contaminated by Phoenician influence,
Aphrodite in Homer is purely Greek, in grace and happy humanity.

The origins of Aphrodite, unlike the origins of Apollo, cannot be found
in a state of low savagery.  She is a departmental Goddess, and as such,
as ruling a province of human passion, she belongs to a late development
of religion.  To Christianity she was a scandal, one of the scandals
which are absent from the most primitive of surviving creeds.  Polytheism,
as if of set purpose, puts every conceivable aspect of life, good or bad,
under divine sanction.  This is much less the case in the religion of the
very backward races.  We do not know historically, what the germs of
religion were; if we look at the most archaic examples, for instance in
Australia or the Andaman Islands, we find neither sacrifice nor
departmental deities.

Religion there is mainly a belief in a primal Being, not necessarily
conceived as spiritual, but rather as an undying magnified Man, of
indefinitely extensive powers.  He dwells above "the vaulted sky beyond
which lies the mysterious home of that great and powerful Being, who is
Bunjil, Baiame, or Daramulun in different tribal languages, but who in
all is known by a name the equivalent of the only one used by the Kurnai,
which is Mungan-ngaur, or 'Our Father.'" {45}  This Father is conceived
of in some places as "a very great old man with a long beard," enthroned
on, or growing into, a crystal throne.  Often he is served by a son or
sons (Apollo, Hermes), frequently regarded as spiritually begotten;
elsewhere, looked on as the son of the wife of the deity, and as father
of the tribe. {46a}  Scandals connected with fatherhood, amorous
intrigues so abundant in Greek mythology, are usually not reported among
the lowest races.  In one known case, the deity, Pundjel or Bunjil, takes
the wives of Karween, who is changed into a crane. {46b}  This is one of
the many savage aetiological myths which account for the peculiarities of
animals as a result of metamorphosis, in the manner of Ovid.  It has been
connected with the legend of Bunjil, who is thus envisaged, not as "Our
Father" beyond the vault of heaven, who still inspires poets, {46c} but
as a wandering, shape-shifting medicine-man.  Zeus, the Heavenly Father,
of course appears times without number in the same contradictory aspect.

But such anecdotes are either not common, or are not frequently reported,
in the faiths of the most archaic of known races.  Much more frequently
we find the totemistic conception.  All the kindreds with animal names
(why adopted we do not know) are apt to explain these designations by
descent from the animals selected, or by metamorphosis of the primal
beasts into men.  This collides with the other notions of descent from,
or creation or manufacture out of clay, by the primal Being, "Father
Ours."  Such contradictions are nothing to the savage theologian, who is
no reconciler or apologist.  But when reconciliation and apology are
later found to be desirable, as in Greece, it is easy to explain that we
are descended _both_ from Our Father, and from a swan, cow, ant, serpent,
dog, wolf, or what you will.  That beast was Our Father, say Father Zeus,
in animal disguise.  Thus Greek legends of bestial amours of a God are
probably, in origin, not primitive, but scandals produced in the effort
to reconcile contradictory myths.  The result is a worse scandal, an
accretion of more low myths about a conception of the primal Being which
was, relatively, lofty and pure.

Again, as aristocracies arose, the chief families desired to be sons of
the Father in a special sense: not as common men are.  Her Majesty's
lineage may thus be traced to Woden!  Now each such descent required a
separate divine amour, and a new scandalous story of Zeus or Apollo,
though Zeus may originally have been as celibate as the Australian Baiame
or Noorele are, in some legends.  Once more, syncretism came in as a
mythopoeic influence.  Say that several Australian nations, becoming more
polite, amalgamated into a settled people.  Then we should have several
Gods, the chief Beings of various tribes, say Noorele, Bunjil, Mungan-
ngaur, Baiame, Daramulun, Mangarrah, Mulkari, Pinmeheal.  The most
imposing God of the dominant tribe might be elevated to the sovereignty
of Zeus.  But, in the new administration, places must be found for the
other old tribal Gods.  They are, therefore, set over various
departments: Love, War, Agriculture, Medicine, Poetry, Commerce, while
one or more of the sons take the places of Apollo and Hermes.  There
appears to be a very early example of syncretism in Australia.  Daramulun
(Papang, Our Father) is "Master of All," on the coast, near Shoalhaven
River.  Baiame is "Master of All," far north, on the Barwan.  But the
locally intermediate tribe of the Wiraijuri, or Wiradthuri, have adopted
Baiame, and reduced Daramulun to an exploded bugbear, a merely nominal
superintendent of the Mysteries; and the southern Coast Murring have
rejected Baiame altogether, or never knew him, while making Daramulun
supreme.

One obvious method of reconciling various tribal Gods in a syncretic
Olympus, is the genealogical.  All are children of Zeus, for example, or
grandchildren, or brothers and sisters.  Fancy then provides an amour to
account for each relationship.  Zeus loved Leto, Leda, Europa, and so
forth.  Thus a God, originally innocent and even moral, becomes a perfect
pattern of vice; and the eternal contradiction vexes the souls of
Xenophanes, Plato, and St. Augustine.  Sacrifices, even human sacrifices,
wholly unknown to the most archaic faiths, were made to ghosts of men:
and especially of kings, in the case of human sacrifice.  Thence they
were transferred to Gods, and behold a new scandal, when men began to
reflect under more civilised conditions.  Thus all these legends of
divine amours and sins, or most of them, including the wanton legend of
Aphrodite, and all the human sacrifices which survived to the disgrace of
Greek religion, are really degrading accessories to the most archaic
beliefs.  They are products, not of the most rudimentary savage
existence, but of the evolution through the lower and higher barbarism.
The worst features of savage ritual are different--taking the lines of
sorcery, of cruel initiations, and, perhaps, of revival of the licence of
promiscuity, or of Group Marriage.  Of these things the traces are not
absent from Greek faith, but they are comparatively inconspicuous.

Buffoonery, as we have seen, exists in all grades of civilised or savage
rites, and was not absent from the popular festivals of the mediaeval
Church: religion throwing her mantle over every human field of action, as
over Folk Medicine.  On these lines I venture to explain what seem to me
the strange and repugnant elements of the religion of a people so
refined, and so capable of high moral ideas, as the Greeks.  Aphrodite is
personified desire, but religion did not throw her mantle over desire
alone; the cloistered life, the frank charm of maidenhood, were as dear
to the Greek genius, and were consecrated by the examples of Athene,
Artemis, and Hestia.  She presides over the pure element of the fire of
the hearth, just as in the household did the daughter of the king or
chief.  Hers are the first libations at feasts (xxviii. 5), though in
Homer they are poured forth to Hermes.

We may explain the Gods of the minor hymns in the same way.  Pan, for
instance, as the son of Hermes, inherits the wild, frolicsome, rural
aspect of his character.  The Dioscuri answer to the Vedic Asvins, twin
rescuers of men in danger on land or sea: perhaps the Evening and Morning
Star.  Dionysus is another aspect of the joy of life and of the world and
the vintaging.  Moon and Sun, Selene and Helios, appear as quite distinct
from Artemis and Apollo; Gaea, the Earth, is equally distinct from
Demeter.  The Hymn to Ares is quite un-Homeric in character, and is oddly
conceived in the spirit of the Scottish poltroon, who cries to his
friend, "Haud me, haud me, or I'll fecht!"  The war-god is implored to
moderate the martial eagerness of the poet.  The original collector here
showed lack of discrimination.  At no time, however, was Ares a popular
God in Greece; in Homer he is a braggart and coward.




THE HYMN TO DEMETER


The beautiful Hymn to Demeter, an example of Greek religious faith in its
most pensive and most romantic aspects, was found in the last century
(1780), in Moscow.  _Inter pullos et porcos latitabat_: the song of the
rural deity had found its way into the haunts of the humble creatures
whom she protected.  A discovery even more fortunate, in 1857, led Sir
Charles Newton to a little _sacellum_, or family chapel, near Cnidos.  On
a platform of rock, beneath a cliff, and looking to the Mediterranean,
were the ruins of the ancient shrine: the votive offerings; the lamps
long without oil or flame; the Curses, or Dirae, inscribed on thin sheets
of lead, and directed against thieves or rivals.  The head of the statue,
itself already known, was also discovered.  Votive offerings, cheap
curses, objects of folk-lore rite and of sympathetic magic,--these are
connected with the popular, the peasant aspect of the religion of
Demeter.  She it is to whom pigs are sacrificed: who makes the fields
fertile with scattered fragments of their flesh; and her rustic effigy,
at Theocritus's feast of the harvest home, stands smiling, with corn and
poppies in her hands.

[Mourning Demeter.  Marble statue from Knidos.  In the British Museum:
lang54.jpg]

But the Cnidian shrine had once another treasure, the beautiful
melancholy statue of the seated Demeter of the uplifted eyes; the
mourning mother: the weary seeker for the lost maiden: her child
Persephone.  Far from the ruins above the sea, beneath the scorched
seaward wall of rock: far from the aromatic fragrance of the
rock-nourished flowers, from the bees, and the playful lizards, Demeter
now occupies her place in the great halls of the British Museum.  Like
the Hymn, this melancholy and tender work of art is imperfect, but the
sentiment is thereby rather increased than impaired.  The ancients buried
things broken with the dead, that the shadows of tool, or weapon, or vase
might be set free, to serve the shadows of their masters in the land of
the souls.  Broken as they, too, are, the Hymn and the statue are "free
among the dead," and eloquent of the higher religion that, in Greece,
attached itself to the lost Maiden and the sorrowing Mother.  Demeter, in
religion, was more than a fertiliser of the fields: Kore, the Maiden, was
more than the buried pig, or the seed sown to await its resurrection; or
the harvest idol, fashioned of corn-stalks: more even than a symbol of
the winter sleep and vernal awakening of the year and the life of nature.
She became the "dread Persephone" of the Odyssey,

   "A Queen over death and the dead."

In her winter retreat below the earth she was the bride of the Lord of
Many Guests, and the ruler "of the souls of men outworn."  In this office
Odysseus in Homer knows her, though neither Iliad nor Odyssey recognises
_Kore_ as the maiden Spring, the daughter and companion of Demeter as
Goddess of Grain.  Christianity, even, did not quite dethrone Persephone.
She lives in two forms: first, as the harvest effigy made of corn-stalks
bound together, the last gleanings; secondly, as "the Fairy Queen
Proserpina," who carried Thomas the Rhymer from beneath the Eildon Tree
to that land which lies beyond the stream of slain men's blood.

   "For a' the bluid that's shed on earth
   Flows through the streams of that countrie."

[Silver denarius of C. Vibius Pansa (about 90 B.C.).  Obv.  Head of
Apollo.  Rev.  Demeter searching for Persephone: lang56.jpg]

Thus tenacious of life has been the myth of Mother and Maiden, a natural
flower of the human heart, found, unborrowed, by the Spaniards in the
maize-fields of Peru.  Clearly the myth is a thing composed of many
elements, glad and sad as the waving fields of yellow grain, or as the
Chthonian darkness under earth where the seed awaits new life in the new
year.  The creed is practical as the folk-lore of sympathetic magic,
which half expects to bring good harvest luck by various mummeries; and
the creed is mystical as the hidden things and words unknown which
assured Pindar and Sophocles of secure felicity in this and in the future
life.

The creed is beautiful as the exquisite profile of the corn-tressed head
of Persephone on Syracusan coins: and it is grotesque as the custom which
bade the pilgrims to Eleusis bathe in the sea, each with the pig which he
was about to sacrifice.  The highest religious hopes, the meanest magical
mummeries are blended in this religion.  That one element is earlier than
the other we cannot say with much certainty.  The ritual aspect, as
concerned with the happy future of the soul, does not appear in Iliad or
Odyssey, where the Mysteries are not named.  But the silence of Homer is
never a safe argument in favour of his ignorance, any more than the
absence of allusion to tobacco in Shakspeare is a proof that tobacco was,
in his age, unknown.

We shall find that a barbaric people, the Pawnees, hold a mystery
precisely parallel to the Demeter legend: a Mystery necessarily
unborrowed from Greece.  The Greeks, therefore, may have evolved the
legend long before Homer's day, and he may have known the story which he
does not find occasion to tell.  As to what was said, shown, and done in
the Eleusinia, we only gather that there was a kind of Mystery Play on
the sacred legend; that there were fastings, vigils, sacrifices, secret
objects displayed, sacred words uttered; and that thence such men as
Pindar and Sophocles received the impression that for them, in this and
the future life, all was well, was well for those of pure hearts and
hands.  The "purity" may partly have been ritual, but was certainly
understood, also, as relating to excellence of life.  Than such a faith
(for faith it is) religion has nothing better to give.  But the extreme
diligence of scholars and archaeologists can tell us nothing more
definite.  The impressions on the souls of the initiated may have been
caused merely by that dim or splendid religious light of the vigils, and
by association with sacred things usually kept in solemn sanctuaries.
Again, mere buffoonery (as is common in savage Mysteries) brought the
pilgrims back to common life when they crossed the bridge on their return
to Athens; just as the buffooneries of Baubo brought a smile to the sad
lips of Demeter.  Beyond this all is conjecture, and the secret may have
been so well kept just because, in fact, there was no secret to keep.
{59}

Till the end of the present century, mythologists did not usually employ
the method of comparing Greek rites and legends with, first, the
sympathetic magic and the fables of peasant folk-lore; second, with the
Mysteries and myths of contemporary savage races, of which European folk-
lore is mainly a survival.  For a study of Demeter from these sides (a
study still too much neglected in Germany) readers may consult
Mannhardt's works, Mr. Frazer's "Golden Bough," and the present
translator's "Custom and Myth," and "Myth, Ritual, and Religion."  Mr.
Frazer, especially, has enabled the English reader to understand the
savage and rural element of sympathetic magic as a factor in the Demeter
myth.  Meanwhile Mr. Pater has dealt with the higher sentiment, the more
religious aspect, of the myth and the rites.  I am not inclined to go all
lengths with Mr. Frazer's ingenious and learned system, as will be seen,
while regretting that the new edition of his "Golden Bough" is not yet
accessible.

If we accept (which I do not entirely) Mr. Frazer's theory of the origin
of the Demeter myth, there is no finer example of the Greek power of
transforming into beauty the superstitions of Barbarism.  The explanation
to which I refer is contained in Mr. J. G. Frazer's learned and ingenious
work, "The Golden Bough."  While mythologists of the schools of Mr. Max
Muller and Kuhn have usually resolved most Gods and heroes into Sun, Sky,
Dawn, Twilight; or, again, into elemental powers of Thunder, Tempest,
Lightning, and Night, Mr. Frazer is apt to see in them the Spirit of
Vegetation.  Osiris is a Tree Spirit or a Corn Spirit (Mannhardt, the
founder of the system, however, took Osiris to be the Sun).  Balder is
the Spirit of the Oak.  The oak, "we may certainly conclude, was one of
the chief, if not the very chief divinity of the Aryans before the
dispersion." {61}  If so, the Aryans before the dispersion were on an
infinitely lower religious level than those Australian tribes, whose
chief divinity is not a gum-tree, but a being named "Our Father,"
dwelling beyond the visible heavens.  When we remember the vast numbers
of gods of sky or heaven among many scattered races, and the obvious
connection of Zeus with the sky (_sub Jove frigido_), and the usually
assigned sense of the name of Zeus, it is not easy to suppose that he was
originally an oak.  But Mr. Frazer considers the etymological connection
of Zeus with the Sanscrit word for sky, an insufficient reason for
regarding Zeus as, in origin, a sky-god.  He prefers, it seems, to
believe that, as being the wood out of which fire was kindled by some
Aryan-speaking peoples, the oak may have come to be called "The Bright or
Shining One" (Zeus, Jove), by the ancient Greeks and Italians. {62}  The
Greeks, in fact, used the laurel (_daphne_) for making fire, not, as far
as I am aware, the oak.  Though the oak was the tree of Zeus, the heavens
were certainly his province, and, despite the oak of Dodona, and the oak
on the Capitol, he is much more generally connected with the sky than
with the tree.  In fact this reduction of Zeus, in origin, to an oak,
rather suggests that the spirit of system is too powerful with Mr.
Frazer.

He makes, perhaps, a more plausible case for his reduction of dread
Persephone to a Pig.  The process is curious.  Early agricultural man
believed in a Corn Spirit, a spiritual essence animating the grain (in
itself no very unworthy conception).  But because, as the field is mown,
animals in the corn are driven into the last unshorn nook, and then into
the open, the beast which rushed out of the last patch was identified
with the Corn Spirit in some animal shape, perhaps that of a pig; many
other animals occur.  The pig has a great part in the ritual of Demeter.
Pigs of pottery were found by Sir Charles Newton on her sacred ground.
The initiate in the Mysteries brought pigs to Eleusis, and bathed with
them in the sea.  The pig was sacrificed to her; in fact (though not in
our Hymn) she was closely associated with pigs.  "We may now ask . . .
may not the pig be nothing but the Goddess herself in animal form?" {64a}
She would later become anthropomorphic: a lovely Goddess, whose hair, as
in the Hymn, is "yellow as ripe corn."  But the prior pig could not be
shaken off.  At the Attic Thesmophoria the women celebrated the Descent
and Ascent of Persephone,--a "double" of Demeter.  In this rite pigs and
other things were thrown into certain caverns.  Later, the cold remains
of pig were recovered and placed on the altar.  Fragments were scattered
for luck on the fields with the seed-corn.  A myth explained that a flock
of pigs were swallowed by Earth when Persephone was ravished by Hades to
the lower world, of which matter the Hymn says nothing.  "In short, the
pigs were Proserpine." {64b}  The eating of pigs at the Thesmophoria was
"a partaking of the body of the God," though the partakers, one thinks,
must have been totally unconscious of the circumstance.  We must presume
that (if this theory be correct) a very considerable time was needed for
the evolution of a pig into the Demeter of the Hymn, and the change is
quite successfully complete; a testimony to the transfiguring power of
the Greek genius.

We may be inclined to doubt, however, whether the task before the genius
of Greece, the task of making Proserpine out of a porker, was really so
colossal.  The primitive mind is notoriously capable of entertaining,
simultaneously, the most contradictory notions.  Thus, in the Australian
"Legend of Eerin," the mourners implore Byamee to accept the soul of the
faithful Eerin into his Paradise, Bullimah.  No doubt Byamee heard, yet
Eerin is now a little owl of plaintive voice, which ratters warning cries
in time of peril. {65}  No incongruity of this kind is felt to be a
difficulty by the childlike narrators.  Now I conceive that, starting
with the relatively high idea of a Spirit of the Grain, early man was
quite capable of envisaging it both spiritually and in zoomorphic form
(accidentally conditioned here into horse, there into goat, pig, or what
not).  But these views of his need not exclude his simultaneous belief in
the Corn Spirit as a being anthropomorphic, "Mother Earth," or "Mother
Grain," as we follow the common etymology; or that of Mannhardt ([Greek
text]) [Greek text]="barley-mother").  If I am right, poetry and the
higher religion moved from the first on the line of the anthropomorphic
Lady of the Harvest and the Corn, Mother Barley: while the popular folk-
lore of the Corn Spirit (which found utterance in the mirth of
harvesting, and in the magic ritual for ensuring fertility), followed on
the line of the pig.  At some seasons, and in some ceremonies, the pig
represented the genius of the corn: in general, the Lady of the Corn
was--Demeter.  We really need not believe that the two forms of the
genius of the corn were ever _consciously_ identified.  Demeter never was
a Pig! {66}

"The Peruvians, we are told, believed all useful plants to be animated by
a divine being who causes their growth," says Mr. Frazer. {67}  The
genealogical table, then, in my opinion, is:--

Divine Being of the Grain.
            |
  +---------+--------------------------+
  |                                    |
(_Anthropomorphized_).             (_Zoomorphised_).
Mother of Corn.                    Pig, Horse,
    Demeter.                         and so on.

Thus the Greek genius had other and better materials to work on, in
evolving Demeter, than the rather lowly animal which is associated with
her rites.  If any one objects that animal gods always precede
anthropomorphic gods in evolution, we reply that, in the most archaic of
known races, the deities are represented in human guise at the Mysteries,
though there are animal Totems, and though, in myth, the deity may, and
often does, assume shapes of bird or beast. {68}

Among rites of the backward races, none, perhaps, so closely resembles
the Eleusinian Mysteries as the tradition of the Pawnees.  In Attica,
Hades, Lord of the Dead, ravishes away Persephone, the vernal daughter of
Demeter.  Demeter then wanders among men, and is hospitably received by
Celeus, King of Eleusis.  Baffled in her endeavour to make his son
immortal, she demands a temple, where she sits in wrath, blighting the
grain.  She is reconciled by the restoration of her daughter, at the
command of Zeus.  But for a third of the year Persephone, having tasted a
pomegranate seed in Hades, has to reign as Queen of the Dead, beneath the
earth.  Scenes from this tale were, no doubt, enacted at the Mysteries,
with interludes of buffoonery, such as relieved most ancient and all
savage Mysteries.  The allegory of the year's death and renewal probably
afforded a text for some discourse, or spectacle, concerned with the
future life.

Among the Pawnees, not a mother and daughter, but two primal beings,
brothers, named Manabozho and Chibiabos, are the chief characters.  The
Manitos (spirits or gods) drown Chibiabos.  Manabozho mourns and smears
his face with black, as Demeter wears black raiment.  He laments
Chibiabos ceaselessly till the Manitos propitiate him with gifts and
ceremonies.  They offer to him a cup, like the beverage prepared for
Demeter, in the Hymn, by Iambe.  He drinks it, is glad, washes off the
black stain of mourning, and is himself again, while Earth again is
joyous.  The Manitos restore Chibiabos to life; but, having once died, he
may not enter the temple, or "Medicine Lodge."  He is sent to reign over
the souls of the departed as does Persephone.  Manabozho makes offerings
to Mesukkumikokwi, the "Earth Mother" of the Pawnees.  The story is
enacted in the sacred dances of the Pawnees. {69}

The Pawnee ideas have fallen, with singularly accurate coincidence, into
the same lines as those of early Greece.  Some moderns, such as M.
Foucart, have revived the opinion of Herodotus, that the Mysteries were
brought from Greece to Egypt.  But, as the Pawnee example shows, similar
natural phenomena may anywhere beget similar myths and rites.  In Greece
the _donnee_ was a nature myth, and a ritual in which it was enacted.
That ritual was a form of sympathetic magic, and the myth explained the
performances.  The refinement and charm of the legend (on which Homer, as
we saw, does not touch) is due to the unique genius of Greece.  Demeter
became the deity most familiar to the people, nearest to their hearts and
endowed with most temples; every farm possessing her rural shrine.  But
the Chthonian, or funereal, aspect of Chibiabos, or of Persephone, is due
to a mood very distinct from that which sacrifices pigs as embodiments of
the Corn Spirit, if that be the real origin of the practice.

We should much misconceive the religious spirit of the Greek rite if we
undertook to develop it all out an origin in sympathetic magic: which, of
course, I do not understand Mr. Frazer to do.  Greek scholars, again, are
apt to view these researches into savage or barbaric origins with great
distaste and disfavour.  This is not a scientific frame of mind.  In the
absence of such researches other purely fanciful origins have been
invented by scholars, ancient or modern.  It is necessary to return to
the pedestrian facts, if merely in order to demonstrate the futility of
the fancies.  The result is in no way discreditable to Greece.  Beginning,
like other peoples, with the vague unrealised conception of the Corn
Mother (an idea which could not occur before the agricultural stage of
civilisation), the Greeks refined and elevated the idea into the Demeter
of the Hymn, and of the Cnidian statue.  To do this was the result of
their unique gifts as a race.  Meanwhile the other notion of a Ruler of
Souls, in Greece attached to Persephone, is found among peoples not yet
agricultural: nomads living on grubs, roots, seeds of wild grasses, and
the products of the chase.  Almost all men's ideas are as old as mankind,
so far as we know mankind.

Conceptions originally "half-conscious," and purely popular, as of a
Spirit of Vegetation, incarnate, as it were, in each year's growth, were
next handled by conscious poets, like the author of our Hymn, and then
are "realised as abstract symbols, because intensely characteristic
examples of moral, or spiritual conditions." {72}  Thus Demeter and
Persephone, no longer pigs or Grain-Mothers, "lend themselves to the
elevation and the correction of the sentiments of sorrow and awe, by the
presentment to the senses and imagination of an ideal expression of them.
Demeter cannot but seem the type of divine grief.  Persephone is the
Goddess of Death, yet with a promise of life to come."

That the Eleusinia included an ethical element seems undeniable.  This
one would think probable, _a priori_, on the ground that Greek Mysteries
are an embellished survival of the initiatory rites of savages, which do
contain elements of morality.  This I have argued at some length in
"Myth, Ritual, and Religion."  Many strange customs in some Greek
Mysteries, such as the daubing of the initiate with clay, the use of the
[Greek text] (the Australian _Tundun_, a small piece of wood whirled
noisily by a string), the general suggestion of _a new life_, the
flogging of boys at Sparta, their retreat, each with his instructor
(Australian _kabbo_, Greek [Greek text]) to the forests, are precisely
analogous to things found in Australia, America, and Africa.  Now savage
rites are often associated with what we think gross cruelty, and, as in
Fiji, with abandoned license, of which the Fathers also accuse the
Greeks.  But, among the Yao of Central Africa, the initiator, observes
Mr. Macdonald, "is said to give much good advice.  His lectures condemn
selfishness, and a selfish person is called _mwisichana_, that is,
'uninitiated.'" {74a}

Among the Australians, Dampier, in 1688, observed the singular unselfish
generosity of distribution of food to the old, the weak, and the sick.
According to Mr. Howitt, the boys of the Coast Murring tribe are taught
in the Mysteries "to speak the straightforward truth while being
initiated, and are warned to avoid various offences against propriety and
morality."  The method of instruction is bad, a pantomimic representation
of the sin to be avoided, but the intention is excellent. {74b}  Among
the Kurnai respect for the old, for unprotected women, the duty of
unselfishness, and other ethical ideas are inculcated, {74c} while
certain food taboos prevail during the rite, as was also the case in the
Eleusinia.  That this moral idea of "sharing what they have with their
friends" is not confined merely to the tribe, is proved by the experience
of John Finnegan, a white man lost near Moreton Bay early in this
century.  "At all times, whether they had much or little, fish or
kangaroo, they always gave me as much as I could eat."  Even when the
whites stole the fish of the natives, and were detected, "instead of
attempting to repossess themselves of the fish, they instantly set at
work to procure more for us, and one or two fetched us as much _dingowa_
as they could carry." {75}  The first English settlers in Virginia, on
the other hand, when some native stole a cup, burned down the whole town.

Thus the morality of the savage is not merely tribal (as is often
alleged), and is carried into practice, as well as inculcated, in some
regions, not in all, during the Mysteries.

For these reasons, if the Greek Mysteries be survivals of savage
ceremonies (as there is no reason to doubt that they are), the savage
association of moral instruction with mummeries might survive as easily
as anything else.  That it did survive is plain from numerous passages in
classical authors. {76a}  The initiate "live a pious life in regard to
strangers and citizens."  They are to be "conscious of no evil": they are
to "protect such as have wrought no unrighteousness."  Such precepts
"have their root in the ethico-religious consciousness." {76b}  It is not
mere ritual purity that the Mysteries demand, either among naked
Australians, or Yao, or in Greece.  Lobeck did his best to minimise the
testimony to the higher element in the Eleusinia, but without avail.  The
study of early, barbaric, savage, classical, Egyptian, or Indian
religions should not be one-sided.  Men have always been men, for good as
well as for evil; and religion, almost everywhere, is allied with ethics
no less than it is overrun by the parasite of myth, and the survival of
magic in ritual.  The Mother and the Maid were "Saviours" ([Greek text]),
"holy" and "pure," despite contradictory legends. {77}  The tales of
incest, as between Zeus and Persephone, are the result of the
genealogical mania.  The Gods were grouped in family-relationships, to
account for their companionship in ritual, and each birth postulated an
amour.  None the less the same deities offered "salvation," of a sort,
and were patrons of conduct.

Greek religion was thus not destitute of certain chief elements in our
own.  But these were held in solution, with a host of other warring
elements, lustful, cruel, or buffooning.  These elements Greece was
powerless to shake off; philosophers, by various expedients, might
explain away the contradictory myths which overgrew the religion, but
ritual, the luck of the State, and popular credulity, were tenacious of
the whole strange mingling of beliefs and practices.

* * * * *

The view taken of the Eleusinia in this note is hardly so exalted as that
of Dr. Hatch.  "The main underlying conception of initiation was that
there were elements in human life from which the candidate must purify
himself before he could be fit to approach God."  The need of
purification, ritual and moral, is certain, but one is not aware of
anything in the purely popular or priestly religion of Greece which
exactly answers to our word "God" as used in the passage cited.
Individuals, by dint of piety or of speculation, might approach the
conception, and probably many did, both in and out of the philosophic
schools.  But traditional ritual and myth could scarcely rise to this
ideal; and it seems exaggerated to say of the crowded Eleusinian throng
of pilgrims that "the race of mankind was lifted on to a higher plane
when it came to be taught that only the pure in heart can see God." {78}
The black native boys in Australia pass through a purgative ceremony to
cure them of selfishness, and afterwards the initiator points to the blue
vault of sky, bidding them behold "Our Father, Mungan-ngaur."  This is
very well meant, and very creditable to untutored savages: and creditable
ideas were not absent from the Eleusinia.  But when we use the quotation,
"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God," our meaning,
though not very definite, is a meaning which it would be hazardous to
attribute to a black boy,--or to Sophocles.  The idea of the New Life
appears to occur in Australian Mysteries: a tribesman is buried, and
rises at a given signal.  But here the New Life is rather that of the lad
admitted to full tribal privileges (including moral precepts) than that
of a converted character.  Confirmation, rather than conversion, is the
analogy.  The number of those analogies of ancient and savage with
Christian religion is remarkable.  But even in Greek Mysteries the
conceptions are necessarily not so purely spiritual as in the Christian
creed, of which they seem half-conscious and fragmentary anticipations.
Or we may regard them as suggestions, which Christianity selected,
accepted, and purified.




HYMN TO DEMETER


THE ALLEGED EGYPTIAN ORIGINS


In what has been said as to the Greek Mysteries, I have regarded them as
of native origin.  I have exhibited rites of analogous kinds in the germ,
as it were, among savage and barbaric communities.  In Peru, under the
Incas, we actually find Mama and Cora (Demeter and Kore) as Goddesses of
the maize (Acosta), and for rites of sympathetic magic connected with the
production of fertile harvests (as in the Thesmophoria at Athens) it is
enough to refer to the vast collection in Mr. Frazer's "Golden Bough."  I
have also indicated the closest of all known parallels to the Eleusinian
in a medicine-dance and legend of the Pawnees.  For other savage
Mysteries in which a moral element occurs, I have quoted Australian and
African examples.  Thence I have inferred that the early Greeks might,
and probably did, evolve their multiform mystic rites out of germs of
such things inherited from their own prehistoric ancestors.  No process,
on the other hand, of borrowing from Greece can conceivably account for
the Pawnee and Peruvian rites, so closely analogous to those of Hellas.
Therefore I see no reason why, if Egypt, for instance, presents parallels
to the Eleusinia, we should suppose that the prehistoric Greeks borrowed
the Eleusinia from Egypt.  These things can grow up, autochthonous and
underived, out of the soil of human nature anywhere, granting certain
social conditions.  Monsieur Foucart, however, has lately argued in
favour of an Egyptian origin of the Eleusinia. {82}

The Greeks naturally identified Demeter and Dionysus with Isis and
Osiris.  There were analogies in the figures and the legends, and that
was enough.  So, had the Greeks visited America, they would have
recognised Demeter in the Pawnee Earth Mother, and Persephone or
Eubouleus in Chibiabos.  To account for the similarities they would
probably have invented a fable of Pawnee visitors to Greece, or of Greek
missionaries among the Pawnees.  So they were apt to form a theory of an
Egyptian origin of Dionysus and Demeter.

M. Foucart, however, argues that agriculture, corn-growing at least, came
into Greece at one stride, barley and wheat not being indigenous in a
wild state.  The Greeks, however, may have brought grain in their
original national migration (the Greek words for grain and ploughing are
common to other families of Aryan speech) or obtained it from Phoenician
settlements.  Demeter, however, in M. Foucart's theory, would be the
Goddess of the foreigners who carried the grain first to Hellas.  Now
both the Homeric epics and the Egyptian monuments show us Egypt and
Greece in contact in the Greek prehistoric period.  But it does not
exactly follow that the prehistoric Greeks would adopt Egyptian gods; or
that the Thesmophoria, an Athenian harvest-rite of Demeter, was founded
by colonists from Egypt, answering to the daughters of Danaus. {84}
Egyptians certainly did not introduce the similar rite among the Khonds,
or the Incas.  The rites _could_ grow up without importation, as the
result of the similarities of primitive fancy everywhere.  If Isis is
Lady of the Grain in Egypt, so is Mama in Peru, and Demeter need no more
have been imported from Egypt than Mama.  If Osiris taught the arts of
life and the laws of society in Egypt, so did Daramulun in Australia, and
Yehl in British Columbia.  All the gods and culture heroes everywhere
play this _role_--in regions where importation of the idea from Egypt is
utterly out of the question.  Even in minute details, legends recur
everywhere; the _phallus_ of a mutilated Australian being of the fabulous
"Alcheringa time," is hunted for by his wives; exactly as Isis wanders in
search of the _phallus_ of the mutilated Osiris. {85a}  Is anything in
the Demeter legend so like the Isis legend as this Australian
coincidence?  Yet the Arunta did not borrow it from Egypt. {85b}  The
mere fact, again, that there were Mysteries both in Egypt and Greece
proves nothing.  There is a river in Monmouth, and a river in Macedon;
there are Mysteries in almost all religions.

Again, it is argued, the Gods of the Mysteries in Egypt and Greece had
secret names, only revealed to the initiated.  So, too, in Australia,
women (never initiated) and boys before initiation, know Daramulun only
as Papang (Father). {85c}  The uninitiated among the Kurnai do not know
the sacred name, Mungan-ngaur. {85d}  The Australian did not borrow this
secrecy from Egypt.  Everywhere a mystery is kept up about proper names.
M. Foucart seems to think that what is practically universal, a taboo on
names, can only have reached Greece by transplantation from Egypt. {86a}
To the anthropologist it seems that scholars, in ignoring the universal
ideas of the lower races, run the risk of venturing on theories at once
superficial and untenable.

M. Foucart has another argument, which does not seem more convincing,
though it probably lights up the humorous or indecent side of the
Eleusinia.  Isocrates speaks of "good offices" rendered to Demeter by
"our ancestors," which "can only be told to the initiate." {86b}  Now
these cannot be the kindly deeds reported in the Hymn, for these were
publicly proclaimed.  What, then, were the _secret_ good offices?  In one
version of the legend the hosts of Demeter were not Celeus and Metaneira,
but Dusaules and Baubo.  The part of Baubo was to relieve the gloom of
the Goddess, not by the harmless pleasantries of Iambe, in the Hymn, but
by obscene gestures.  The Christian Fathers, Clemens of Alexandria at
least, make this a part of their attack on the Mysteries; but it may be
said that they were prejudiced or misinformed. {87a}  But, says M.
Foucart, an inscription has been found in Paros, wherein there is a
dedication to Hera, Demeter Thesmophoros, Kore, and _Babo_, or Baubo.
Again, two authors of the fourth century, Palaephatus and Asclepiades,
cite the Dusaules and Baubo legend. {87b}

Now the indecent gesture of Baubo was part of the comic or obscene folk-
lore of contempt in Egypt, and so M. Foucart thinks that it was borrowed
from Egypt with the Demeter legend. {87c}  Can Isocrates have referred to
_this_ good office?--the amusing of Demeter by an obscene gesture?  If he
did, such gestures as Baubo's are as widely diffused as any other piece
of folk-lore.  In the centre of the Australian desert Mr. Carnegie saw a
native make a derisive gesture which he thought had only been known to
English schoolboys. {88a}  Again, indecent pantomimic dances, said to be
intended to act as "object lessons" in things _not_ to be done, are
common in Australian Mysteries.  Further, we do not know Baubo, or a
counterpart of her, in the ritual of Isis, and the clay figurines of such
a figure, in Egypt, are of the Greek, the Ptolemaic period.  Thus the
evidence comes to this: an indecent gesture of contempt, known in Egypt,
is, at Eleusis, attributed to Baubo.  This does not prove that Baubo was
originally Egyptian. {88b}  Certain traditions make Demeter the mistress
of Celeus. {88c}  Traces of a "mystic marriage," which also occur, are
not necessarily Egyptian: the idea and rite are common.

There remains the question of the sacred objects displayed (possibly
statues, probably very ancient "medicine" things, as among the Pawnees)
and sacred words spoken.  These are said by many authors to confirm the
initiate in their security of hope as to a future life.  Now similar
instruction, as to the details of the soul's voyage, the dangers to
avoid, the precautions to be taken, notoriously occur in the Egyptian
"Book of the Dead."  But very similar fancies are reported from the
Ojibbeways (Kohl), the Polynesians and Maoris (Taylor, Turner, Gill,
Thomson), the early peoples of Virginia, {89a} the modern Arapaho and
Sioux of the Ghost Dance rite, the Aztecs, and so forth.  In all
countries these details are said to have been revealed by men or women
who died, but did not (like Persephone) taste the food of the dead; and
so were enabled to return to earth.  The initiate, at Eleusis, were
guided along a theatrically arranged pathway of the dead, into a
theatrical Elysium. {89b}  Now as such ideas as these occur among races
utterly removed from contact with Egypt, as they are part of the European
folk-lore of the visits of mortals to fairyland (in which it is fatal to
taste fairy food), I do not see that Eleusis need have borrowed such
common elements of early belief from the Egyptians in the seventh century
B.C. {90}  One might as well attribute to Egypt the Finnish legend of the
descent of Wainamoinen into Tuonela; or the experience of the aunt of
Montezuma just before the arrival of Cortes; or the expedition to
fairyland of Thomas the Rhymer.  It is not pretended by M. Foucart that
the _details_ of the "Book of the Dead" were copied in Greek ritual; and
the general idea of a river to cross, of dangerous monsters to avoid, of
perils to encounter, of precautions to be taken by the wandering soul, is
nearly universal, where it must be unborrowed from Egypt, in Polynesian
and Red Indian belief.  As at Eleusis, in these remote tribes formulas of
a preservative character are inculcated.

The "Book of the Dead" was a guidebook of the itinerary of Egyptian
souls.  Very probably similar instruction was given to the initiate at
Eleusis.  But the Fijians also have a regular theory of what is to be
done and avoided on "The Path of the Shades."  The shade is ferried by
Ceba (Charon) over Wainiyalo (Lethe); he reaches the mystic pandanus tree
(here occurs a rite); he meets, and dodges, Drodroyalo and the two
devouring Goddesses; he comes to a spring, and drinks, and forgets sorrow
at Wai-na-dula, the "Water of Solace."  After half-a-dozen other
probations and terrors, he reaches the Gods, "the dancing-ground and the
white quicksand; and then the young Gods dance before them and sing. . . . "
{91a}

Now turn to Plutarch. {91b}  Plutarch compares the soul's mortal
experience with that of the initiate in the Mysteries.  "There are
wanderings, darkness, fear, trembling, shuddering, horror, then a
marvellous light: pure places and meadows, dances, songs, and holy
apparitions."  Plutarch might be summarising the Fijian belief.  Again,
take the mystic golden scroll, found in a Greek grave at Petilia.  It
describes in hexameters the Path of the Shade: the spring and the white
cypress on the left: "Do not approach it.  Go to the other stream from
the Lake of Memory; tell the Guardians that you are the child of Earth
and of the starry sky, but that yours is a heavenly lineage; and they
will give you to drink of that water, and you shall reign with the other
heroes."

Tree, and spring, and peaceful place with dance, song, and divine
apparitions, all are Fijian, all are Greek, yet nothing is borrowed by
Fiji from Greece.  Many other Greek inscriptions cited by M. Foucart
attest similar beliefs.  Very probably such precepts as those of the
Petilia scroll were among the secret instructions of Eleusis.  But they
are not so much Egyptian as human.  Chibiabos is assuredly not borrowed
from Osiris, nor the Fijian faith from the "Book of the Dead."  "Sacred
things," not to be shown to man, still less to woman, date from the
"medicine bag" of the Red Indian, the mystic tribal bundles of the
Pawnees, and the _churinga_, and bark "native portmanteaux," of which Mr.
Carnegie brought several from the Australian desert.

[Demeter and Persephone sending Triptolemos on his mission.  Marble
relief found at Eleusis--now in Athens: lang92.jpg]

For all Greek Mysteries a satisfactory savage analogy can be found.  These
spring straight from human nature: from the desire to place customs, and
duties, and taboos under divine protection; from the need of
strengthening them, and the influence of the elders, by mystic sanctions;
from the need of fortifying and trying the young by probations of
strength, secrecy, and fortitude; from the magical expulsion of hostile
influences; from the sympathetic magic of early agriculture; from study
of the processes of nature regarded as personal; and from guesses,
surmises, visions, and dreams as to the fortunes of the wandering soul on
its way to its final home.  I have shown all these things to be human,
universal, not sprung from one race in one region.  Greek Mysteries are
based on all these natural early conceptions of life and death.  The
early Greeks, like other races, entertained these primitive, or very
archaic ideas.  Greece had no need to borrow from Egypt; and, though
Egypt was within reach, Greece probably developed freely her original
stock of ideas in her own fashion, just as did the Incas, Aztecs,
Australians, Ojibbeways, and the other remote peoples whom I have
selected.  The argument of M. Foucart, I think, is only good as long as
we are ignorant of the universally diffused forms of religious belief
which correspond to the creeds of Eleusis or of Egypt.  In the Greek
Mysteries we have the Greek guise,--solemn, wistful, hopeful, holy, and
pure, yet not uncontaminated with archaic buffoonery,--of notions and
rites, hopes and fears, common to all mankind.  There is no other secret.

The same arguments as I have advanced against Greek borrowing from Egypt,
apply to Greek borrowing from Asia.  Mr. Ramsay, following Mr. Robertson
Smith, suggests that Leto, the mother of Apollo and Artemis, may be "the
old Semitic Al-lat." {95a}  Then we have Leto and Artemis, as the Mother
and the Maid (Kore) with their mystery play.  "Clement describes them"
(the details) as "Eleusinian, for they had spread to Eleusis as the rites
of Demeter and Kore _crossing from Asia to Crete, and from Crete to the
European_ peninsula."  The ritual "remained everywhere fundamentally the
same."  Obviously if the Eleusinian Mysteries are of Phrygian origin
(Ramsay), they cannot also be of Egyptian origin (Foucart).  In truth
they are no more specially of Phrygian or Egyptian than of Pawnee or
Peruvian origin.  Mankind can and does evolve such ideas and rites in any
region of the world. {95b}




CONCLUSION


"What has all this farrago about savages to do with Dionysus?" I conceive
some scholar, or literary critic asking, if such an one looks into this
book.  Certainly it would have been easier for me to abound in aesthetic
criticism of the Hymns, and on the aspect of Greek literary art which
they illustrate.  But the Hymns, if read even through the pale medium of
a translation, speak for themselves.  Their beauties and defects as
poetry are patent: patent, too, are the charm and geniality of the
national character which they express.  The glad Ionian gatherings; the
archaic humour; the delight in life, and love, and nature; the pious
domesticities of the sacred Hearth; the peopling of woods, hills, and
streams with exquisite fairy forms; all these make the poetic delight of
the Hymns.  But all these need no pointing out to any reader.  The poets
can speak for themselves.

On the other hand the confusions of sacred and profane; the origins of
the Mysteries; the beginnings of the Gods in a mental condition long left
behind by Greece when the Hymns were composed; all these matters need
elucidation.  I have tried to elucidate them as results of evolution from
the remote prehistoric past of Greece, which, as it seems, must in many
points have been identical with the historic present of the lowest
contemporary races.  In the same way, if dealing with ornament, I would
derive the spirals, volutes, and concentric circles of Mycenaean gold
work, from the identical motives, on the oldest incised rocks and kists
of our Islands, of North and South America, and of the tribes of Central
Australia, recently described by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen, and Mr.
Carnegie.  The material of the Mycenaean artist may be gold, his work may
be elegant and firm, but he traces the selfsame ornament as the naked
Arunta, with feebler hand, paints on sacred rocks or on the bodies of his
tribesmen.  What is true of ornament is true of myth, rite, and belief.
Greece only offers a gracious modification of the beliefs, rites, and
myths of the races who now are "nearest the beginning," however remote
from that unknown beginning they may be.  To understand this is to come
closer to a true conception of the evolution of Greek faith and art than
we can reach by any other path.  Yet to insist on this is not to ignore
the unmeasured advance of the Greeks in development of society and art.
On that head the Hymns, like all Greek poetry, bear their own free
testimony.  But, none the less, Greek religion and myth present features
repellent to us, which derive their origin, not from savagery, but from
the more crude horrors of the lower and higher barbarisms.

Greek religion, Greek myth, are vast conglomerates.  We find a savage
origin for Apollo, and savage origins for many of the Mysteries.  But the
cruelty of savage initiations has been purified away.  On the other hand,
we find a barbaric origin for departmental gods, such as Aphrodite, and
for Greek human sacrifices, unknown to the lowest savagery.  From
savagery Zeus is probably derived; from savagery come the germs of the
legends of divine amours in animal forms.  But from barbarism arises the
sympathetic magic of agriculture, which the lowest races do not practise.
From the barbaric condition, not from savagery, comes Greek hero-worship,
for the lowest races do not worship ancestral spirits.  Such is the
medley of prehistoric ideas in Greece, while the charm and poetry of the
Hymns are due mainly to the unique genius of the fully developed Hellenic
race.  The combination of good and bad, of ancestral rites and ideas, of
native taste, of philosophical refinement on inherited theology, could
not last; the elements were too discordant.  And yet it could not pass
naturally away.  The Greece of A.D. 300

   "Wandered between two worlds, one dead,
   The other powerless to be born,"

without external assistance.  That help was brought by the Christian
creed, and, officially, Gods, rites, and myths vanished, while,
unofficially, they partially endure, even to this day, in Romaic folk-
lore.




HOMERIC HYMNS


HYMN TO APOLLO


[Silver stater of Croton (about 400 B.C.).  Obv.  Hercules, the Founder.
Rev.  Apollo shooting the Python by the Delphic Tripod: lang103.jpg]

Mindful, ever mindful, will I be of Apollo the Far-darter.  Before him,
as he fares through the hall of Zeus, the Gods tremble, yea, rise up all
from their thrones as he draws near with his shining bended bow.  But
Leto alone abides by Zeus, the Lord of Lightning, till Apollo hath
slackened his bow and closed his quiver.  Then, taking with her hands
from his mighty shoulders the bow and quiver, she hangs them against the
pillar beside his father's seat from a pin of gold, and leads him to his
place and seats him there, while the father welcomes his dear son, giving
him nectar in a golden cup; then do the other Gods welcome him; then they
make him sit, and Lady Leto rejoices, in that she bore the Lord of the
Bow, her mighty son.

[Hail!  O blessed Leto; mother of glorious children, Prince Apollo and
Artemis the Archer; her in Ortygia, him in rocky Delos didst thou bear,
couching against the long sweep of the Cynthian Hill, beside a palm tree,
by the streams of Inopus.]

[Leto.  With her infants, Apollo and Artemis.  From a Vase in the British
Museum.  (Sixth Century B.C.): lang104.jpg]

How shall I hymn thee aright, howbeit thou art, in sooth, not hard to
hymn? {104} for to thee, Phoebus, everywhere have fallen all the ranges
of song, both on the mainland, nurse of young kine, and among the isles;
to thee all the cliffs are dear, and the steep mountain crests and rivers
running onward to the salt sea, and beaches sloping to the foam, and
havens of the deep?  Shall I tell how Leto bore thee first, a delight of
men, couched by the Cynthian Hill in the rocky island, in sea-girt
Delos--on either hand the black wave drives landward at the word of the
shrill winds--whence arising thou art Lord over all mortals?

Among them that dwell in Crete, and the people of Athens, and isle AEgina,
and Euboea famed for fleets, and AEgae and Peiresiae, and Peparethus by
the sea-strand, and Thracian Athos, and the tall crests of Pelion, and
Thracian Samos, and the shadowy mountains of Ida, Scyros, and Phocaea,
and the mountain wall of Aigocane, and stablished Imbros, and
inhospitable Lemnos, and goodly Lesbos, the seat of Makar son of AEolus,
and Chios, brightest of all islands of the deep, and craggy Mimas, and
the steep crests of Mykale, and gleaming Claros, and the high hills of
AEsagee, and watery Samos, and tall ridges of Mycale, and Miletus, and
Cos, a city of Meropian men, and steep Cnidos, and windy Carpathus, Naxos
and Paros, and rocky Rheneia--so far in travail with the Archer God went
Leto, seeking if perchance any land would build a house for her son.

But the lands trembled sore, and were adread, and none, nay not the
richest, dared to welcome Phoebus, not till Lady Leto set foot on Delos,
and speaking winged words besought her:

"Delos, would that thou wert minded to be the seat of my Son, Phoebus
Apollo, and to let build him therein a rich temple!  No other God will
touch thee, nor none will honour thee, for methinks thou art not to be
well seen in cattle or in sheep, in fruit or grain, nor wilt thou grow
plants unnumbered.  But wert thou to possess a temple of Apollo the Far-
darter; then would all men bring thee hecatombs, gathering to thee, and
ever wilt thou have savour of sacrifice . . . from others' hands, albeit
thy soil is poor."

Thus spoke she, and Delos was glad and answered her saying:

"Leto, daughter most renowned of mighty Coeus, right gladly would I
welcome the birth of the Archer Prince, for verily of me there goes an
evil report among men, and thus would I wax mightiest of renown.  But at
this Word, Leto, I tremble, nor will I hide it from thee, for the saying
is that Apollo will be mighty of mood, and mightily will lord it over
mortals and immortals far and wide over the earth, the grain-giver.
Therefore, I deeply dread in heart and soul lest, when first he looks
upon the sunlight, he disdain my island, for rocky of soil am I, and
spurn me with his feet and drive me down in the gulfs of the salt sea.
Then should a great sea-wave wash mightily above my head for ever, but he
will fare to another land, which so pleases him, to fashion him a temple
and groves of trees.  But in me would many-footed sea-beasts and black
seals make their chambers securely, no men dwelling by me.  Nay, still,
if thou hast the heart, Goddess, to swear a great oath that here first he
will build a beautiful temple, to be the shrine oracular of
men--thereafter among all men let him raise him shrines, since his renown
shall be the widest."

So spake she, but Leto swore the great oath of the Gods:

"Bear witness, Earth, and the wide heaven above, and dropping water of
Styx--the greatest oath and the most dread among the blessed Gods--that
verily here shall ever be the fragrant altar and the portion of Apollo,
and thee will he honour above all."

When she had sworn and done that oath, then Delos was glad in the birth
of the Archer Prince.  But Leto, for nine days and nine nights
continually was pierced with pangs of child-birth beyond all hope.  With
her were all the Goddesses, the goodliest, Dione and Rheia, and Ichnaean
Themis, and Amphitrite of the moaning sea, and the other deathless
ones--save white-armed Hera.  Alone she wotted not of it, Eilithyia, the
helper in difficult travail.  For she sat on the crest of Olympus beneath
the golden clouds, by the wile of white-armed Hera, who held her afar in
jealous grudge, because even then fair-tressed Leto was about bearing her
strong and noble son.

But the Goddesses sent forth Iris from the fair-stablished isle, to bring
Eilithyia, promising her a great necklet, golden with amber studs, nine
cubits long.  Iris they bade to call Eilithyia apart from white-armed
Hera, lest even then the words of Hera might turn her from her going.  But
wind-footed swift Iris heard, and fleeted forth, and swiftly she devoured
the space between.  So soon as she came to steep Olympus, the dwelling of
the Gods, she called forth Eilithyia from hall to door, and spake winged
words, even all that the Goddesses of Olympian mansions had bidden her.
Thereby she won the heart in Eilithyia's breast, and forth they fared,
like timid wild doves in their going.

Even when Eilithyia, the helper in sore travailing, set foot in Delos,
then labour took hold on Leto, and a passion to bring to the birth.
Around a palm tree she cast her arms, and set her knees on the soft
meadow, while earth beneath smiled, and forth leaped the babe to light,
and all the Goddesses raised a cry.  Then, great Phoebus, the Goddesses
washed thee in fair water, holy and purely, and wound thee in white
swaddling bands, delicate, new woven, with a golden girdle round thee.
Nor did his mother suckle Apollo the golden-sworded, but Themis with
immortal hands first touched his lips with nectar and sweet ambrosia,
while Leto rejoiced, in that she had borne her strong son, the bearer of
the bow.

Then Phoebus, as soon as thou hadst tasted the food of Paradise, the
golden bands were not proof against thy pantings, nor bonds could bind
thee, but all their ends were loosened.  Straightway among the Goddesses
spoke Phoebus Apollo: "Mine be the dear lyre and bended bow, and I will
utter to men the unerring counsel of Zeus."

So speaking, he began to fare over the wide ways of earth, Phoebus of the
locks unshorn, Phoebus the Far-darter.  Thereon all the Goddesses were in
amaze, and all Delos blossomed with gold, as when a hilltop is heavy with
woodland flowers, beholding the child of Zeus and Leto, and glad because
the God had chosen her wherein to set his home, beyond mainland and
isles, and loved her most at heart.

But thyself, O Prince of the Silver Bow, far-darting Apollo, didst now
pass over rocky Cynthus, now wander among temples and men.  Many are thy
fanes and groves, and dear are all the headlands, and high peaks of lofty
hills, and rivers flowing onward to the sea; but with Delos, Phoebus, art
thou most delighted at heart, where the long-robed Ionians gather in
thine honour, with children and shame-fast wives.  Mindful of thee they
delight thee with boxing, and dances, and minstrelsy in their games.  Who
so then encountered them at the gathering of the Ionians, would say that
they are exempt from eld and death, beholding them so gracious, and would
be glad at heart, looking on the men and fair-girdled women, and their
much wealth, and their swift galleys.  Moreover, there is this great
marvel of renown imperishable, the Delian damsels, hand-maidens of the
Far-darter.  They, when first they have hymned Apollo, and next Leto and
Artemis the Archer, then sing in memory of the men and women of old time,
enchanting the tribes of mortals.  And they are skilled to mimic the
notes and dance music of all men, so that each would say himself were
singing, so well woven is their fair chant.

But now come, be gracious, Apollo, be gracious, Artemis; and ye maidens
all, farewell, but remember me even in time to come, when any of earthly
men, yea, any stranger that much hath seen and much endured, comes hither
and asks:

"Maidens, who is the sweetest to you of singers here conversant, and in
whose song are ye most glad?"

Then do you all with one voice make answer:

"A blind man is he, and he dwells in rocky Chios; his songs will ever
have the mastery, ay, in all time to come."

But I shall bear my renown of you as far as I wander over earth to the
fairest cities of men, and they will believe my report, for my word is
true.  But, for me, never shall I cease singing of Apollo of the Silver
Bow, the Far-darter, whom fair-tressed Leto bore.

O Prince, Lycia is thine, and pleasant Maeonia, and Miletus, a winsome
city by the sea, and thou, too, art the mighty lord of sea-washed Delos.



THE FOUNDING OF DELPHI


The son of glorious Leto fares harping on his hollow harp to rocky Pytho,
clad in his fragrant raiment that waxes not old, and beneath the golden
plectrum winsomely sounds his lyre.  Thence from earth to Olympus, fleet
as thought, he goes to the House of Zeus, into the Consistory of the
other Gods, and anon the Immortals bethink them of harp and minstrelsy.
And all the Muses together with sweet voice in antiphonal chant replying,
sing of the imperishable gifts of the Gods, and the sufferings of men,
all that they endure from the hands of the undying Gods, lives witless
and helpless, men unavailing to find remede for death or buckler against
old age.  Then the fair-tressed Graces and boon Hours, and Harmonia, and
Hebe, and Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus, dance, holding each by the wrist
the other's hand, while among them sings one neither unlovely, nor of
body contemptible, but divinely tall and fair, Artemis the Archer,
nurtured with Apollo.  Among them sport Ares, and the keen-eyed Bane of
Argos, while Phoebus Apollo steps high and disposedly, playing the lyre,
and the light issues round him from twinkling feet and fair-woven
raiment.  But all they are glad, seeing him so high of heart, Leto of the
golden tresses, and Zeus the Counsellor, beholding their dear son as he
takes his pastime among the deathless Gods.

How shall I hymn thee aright, howbeit thou art, in sooth, not hard to
hymn?  Shall I sing of thee in love and dalliance; how thou wentest forth
to woo the maiden Azanian, with Ischys, peer of Gods, and Elation's son
of the goodly steeds, or with Phorbas, son of Triopes, or Amarynthus, or
how with Leucippus and Leucippus' wife, thyself on foot, he in the
chariot . . .? {115}  Or how first, seeking a place of oracle for men,
thou camest down to earth, far-darting Apollo?

On Pieria first didst thou descend from Olympus, and pass by Lacmus, and
Emathia, and Enienae, and through Perrhaebia, and speedily camest to
Iolcus, and alight on Cenaeum in Euboea, renowned for galleys.  On the
Lelantian plain thou stoodest, but it pleased thee not there to stablish
a temple and a grove.  Thence thou didst cross Euripus, far-darting
Apollo, and fare up the green hill divine, and thence camest speedily to
Mycalessus and Teumesos of the bedded meadow grass, and thence to the
place of woodclad Thebe, for as yet no mortals dwelt in Holy Thebe, nor
yet were paths nor ways along Thebe's wheat-bearing plain, but all was
wild wood.

Thence forward journeying, Apollo, thou camest to Onchestus, the bright
grove of Poseidon.  There the new-broken colt takes breath again, weary
though he be with dragging the goodly chariot; and to earth, skilled
though he be, leaps down the charioteer, and fares on foot, while the
horses for a while rattle along the empty car, with the reins on their
necks, and if the car be broken in the grove of trees, their masters tend
them there, and tilt the car and let it lie.  Such is the rite from of
old, and they pray to the King Poseidon, while the chariot is the God's
portion to keep.

Thence faring forward, far-darting Apollo, thou didst win to Cephisus of
the fair streams, that from Lilaea pours down his beautiful waters, which
crossing, Far-darter, and passing Ocalea of the towers, thou camest
thereafter to grassy Haliartus.  Then didst thou set foot on Telphusa,
and to thee the land seemed exceeding good wherein to stablish a temple
and a grove.

Beside Telphusa didst thou stand, and spake to her: "Telphusa, here
methinketh to stablish a fair temple, an oracle for men, who, ever
seeking for the word of sooth, will bring me hither perfect hecatombs,
even they that dwell in the rich isle of Pelops, and all they of the
mainland and sea-girt islands.  To them all shall I speak the decree
unerring, rendering oracles within my rich temple."

So spake Phoebus, and thoroughly marked out the foundations, right long
and wide.  But at the sight the heart of Telphusa waxed wroth, and she
spake her word:

"Phoebus, far-darting Prince, a word shall I set in thy heart.  Here
thinkest thou to stablish a goodly temple, to be a place of oracle for
men, that ever will bring thee hither perfect hecatombs--nay, but this
will I tell thee, and do thou lay it up in thine heart.  The never-ending
din of swift steeds will be a weariness to thee, and the watering of
mules from my sacred springs.  There men will choose rather to regard the
well-wrought chariots, and the stamping of the swift-footed steeds, than
thy great temple and much wealth therein.  But an if thou--that art
greater and better than I, O Prince, and thy strength is most of might--if
thou wilt listen to me, in Crisa build thy fane beneath a glade of
Parnassus.  There neither will goodly chariots ring, nor wilt thou be
vexed with stamping of swift steeds about thy well-builded altar, but
none the less shall the renowned tribes of men bring their gifts to
Iepaeon, and delighted shalt thou gather the sacrifices of them who dwell
around."

Therewith she won over the heart of the Far-darter, even that to Telphusa
herself should be honour in that land, and not to the Far-darter.

Thenceforward didst thou fare, far-darting Apollo, and camest to the city
of the overweening Phlegyae, that reckless of Zeus dwelt there in a
goodly glade by the Cephisian mere.  Thence fleetly didst thou speed to
the ridge of the hills, and camest to Crisa beneath snowy Parnassus, to a
knoll that faced westward, but above it hangs a cliff, and a hollow dell
runs under, rough with wood, and even there Prince Phoebus Apollo deemed
well to build a goodly temple, and spake, saying: "Here methinketh to
stablish a right fair temple, to be a place oracular to men, that shall
ever bring me hither goodly hecatombs, both they that dwell in rich
Peloponnesus, and they of the mainland and sea-girt isles, seeking here
the word of sooth; to them all shall I speak the decree unerring,
rendering oracles within my wealthy shrine."

So speaking, Phoebus Apollo marked out the foundations, right long and
wide, and thereon Trophonius and Agamedes laid the threshold of stone,
the sons of Erginus, dear to the deathless Gods.  But round all the
countless tribes of men built a temple with wrought stones to be famous
for ever in song.

Hard by is a fair-flowing stream, and there, with an arrow from his
strong bow, did the Prince, the son of Zeus, slay the Dragoness, mighty
and huge, a wild Etin, that was wont to wreak many woes on earthly men,
on themselves, and their straight-stepping flocks, so dread a bane was
she.

[This Dragoness it was that took from golden-throned Hera and reared the
dread Typhaon, not to be dealt with, a bane to mortals.  Him did Hera
bear, upon a time, in wrath with father Zeus, whenas Cronides brought
forth from his head renowned Athene.  Straightway lady Hera was angered,
and spake among the assembled Gods:

"Listen to me, ye Gods, and Goddesses all, how cloud-collecting Zeus is
first to begin the dishonouring of me, though he made me his wife in
honour.  And now, apart from me, he has brought forth grey-eyed Athene
who excels among all the blessed Immortals.  But he was feeble from the
birth, among all the Gods, my son Hephaestos, lame and withered of foot,
whom I myself lifted in my hands, and cast into the wide sea.  But the
daughter of Nereus, Thetis of the silver feet, received him and nurtured
him among her sisters.  Would that she had done other grace to the
blessed Immortals!

"Thou evil one of many wiles, what other wile devisest thou?  How hadst
thou the heart now alone to bear grey-eyed Athene?  Could I not have
borne her?  But none the less would she have been called thine among the
Immortals, who hold the wide heaven.  Take heed now, that I devise not
for thee some evil to come.  Yea, now shall I use arts whereby a child of
mine shall be born, excelling among the immortal Gods, without
dishonouring thy sacred bed or mine, for verily to thy bed I will not
come, but far from thee will nurse my grudge against the Immortal Gods."

So spake she, and withdrew from among the Gods with angered heart.  Right
so she made her prayer, the ox-eyed lady Hera, striking the earth with
her hand flatlings, {121} and spake her word:

"Listen to me now, Earth, and wide Heavens above, and ye Gods called
Titans, dwelling beneath earth in great Tartarus, ye from whom spring
Gods and men!  List to me now, all of you, and give me a child apart from
Zeus, yet nothing inferior to him in might, nay, stronger than he, as
much as far-seeing Zeus is mightier than Cronus!"

So spake she, and smote the ground with her firm hand.  Then Earth, the
nurse of life, was stirred, and Hera, beholding it, was glad at heart,
for she deemed that her prayer would be accomplished.  From that hour for
a full year she never came to the bed of wise Zeus, nor to her throne
adorned, whereon she was wont to sit, planning deep counsel, but dwelling
in her temples, the homes of Prayers, she took joy in her sacrifices, the
ox-eyed lady Hera.

Now when her months and days were fulfilled, the year revolving, and the
seasons in their course coming round, she bare a birth like neither Gods
nor mortals, the dread Typhaon, not to be dealt with, a bane of men.  Him
now she took, the ox-eyed lady Hera, and carried and gave to the
Dragoness, to bitter nurse a bitter fosterling, who received him, that
ever wrought many wrongs among the renowned tribes of men.]

Whosoever met the Dragoness, on him would she bring the day of destiny,
before the Prince, far-darting Apollo, loosed at her the destroying
shaft; then writhing in strong anguish, and mightily panting she lay,
rolling about the land.  Dread and dire was the din, as she writhed
hither and thither through the wood, and gave up the ghost, and Phoebus
spoke his malison:

"There do thou rot upon the fruitful earth; no longer shalt thou, at
least, live to be the evil bane of mortals that eat the fruit of the
fertile soil, and hither shall bring perfect hecatombs.  Surely from thee
neither shall Typhoeus, nay, nor Chimaera of the evil name, shield death
that layeth low, but here shall black earth and bright Hyperion make thee
waste away."

So he spake in malison, and darkness veiled her eyes, and there the
sacred strength of the sun did waste her quite away.  Whence now the
place is named Pytho, and men call the Prince "Pythian" for that deed,
for even there the might of the swift sun made corrupt the monster. {124}

Then Phoebus Apollo was ware in his heart that the fair-flowing spring,
Telphusa, had beguiled him, and in wrath he went to her, and swiftly
came, and standing close by her, spoke his word:

"Telphusa, thou wert not destined to beguile my mind, nor keep the
winsome lands and pour forth thy fair waters.  Nay, here shall my honour
also dwell, not thine alone."  So he spoke, and overset a rock, with a
shower of stones, and hid her streams, the Prince, far-darting Apollo.
And he made an altar in a grove of trees, hard by the fair-flowing
stream, where all men name him in prayer, "the Prince Telphusian," for
that he shamed the streams of sacred Telphusa.  Then Phoebus Apollo
considered in his heart what men he should bring in to be his ministers,
and to serve him in rocky Pytho.  While he was pondering on this, he
beheld a swift ship on the wine-dark sea, and aboard her many men and
good, Cretans from Minoan Cnossus, such as do sacrifice to the God, and
speak the doom of Phoebus Apollo of the Golden Sword, what word soever he
utters of sooth from the daphne in the dells of Parnassus.  For barter
and wealth they were sailing in the black ship to sandy Pylos, and the
Pylian men.  Anon Phoebus Apollo set forth to meet them, leaping into the
sea upon the swift ship in the guise of a dolphin, and there he lay, a
portent great and terrible.

[Of the crew, whosoever sought in heart to comprehend what he was . . .
On all sides he kept swaying to and fro, and shaking the timbers of the
galley.]  But all they sat silent and in fear aboard the ship, nor loosed
the sheets, nor the sail of the black-prowed galley; nay, even as they
had first set the sails so they voyaged onward, the strong south-wind
speeding on the vessel from behind.  First they rounded Malea, and passed
the Laconian land and came to Helos, a citadel by the sea, and Taenarus,
the land of Helios, that is the joy of mortals, where ever feed the deep-
fleeced flocks of Prince Helios, and there hath he his glad demesne.
There the crew thought to stay the galley, and land and consider of the
marvel, and see whether that strange thing will abide on the deck of the
hollow ship or leap again into the swell of the fishes' home.  But the
well-wrought ship did not obey the rudder, but kept ever on her way
beyond rich Peloponnesus, Prince Apollo lightly guiding it by the gale.
So accomplishing her course she came to Arene, and pleasant Arguphea, and
Thryon, the ford of Alpheius, and well-builded Aepu, and sandy Pylos, and
the Pylian men, and ran by Crounoi, and Chalcis, and Dyme, and holy Elis,
where the Epeians bear sway.  Then rejoicing in the breeze of Zeus, she
was making for Pherae, when to them out of the clouds showed forth the
steep ridge of Ithaca, and Dulichium, and Same, and wooded Zacynthus.
Anon when she had passed beyond all Peloponnesus, there straightway, off
Crisa, appeared the wide sound, that bounds rich Peloponnesus.  Then came
on the west wind, clear and strong, by the counsel of Zeus, blowing hard
out of heaven, that the running ship might swiftest accomplish her course
over the salt water of the sea.

Backward then they sailed towards the Dawn and the sun, and the Prince
was their guide, Apollo, son of Zeus.  Then came they to far-seen Crisa,
the land of vines, into the haven, while the sea-faring ship beached
herself on the shingle.  Then from the ship leaped the Prince,
far-darting Apollo, like a star at high noon, while the gledes of fire
flew from him, and the splendour flashed to the heavens.  Into his inmost
Holy Place he went through the precious tripods, and in the midst he
kindled a flame showering forth his shafts, and the splendour filled all
Crisa, {127} and the wives of the Crisaeans, and their fair-girdled
daughters raised a wail at the rushing flight of Phoebus, for great fear
fell upon all.  Thence again to the galley he set forth and flew, fleet
as a thought, in shape a man lusty and strong, in his first youth, his
locks swathing his wide shoulders.  Anon he spake to the seamen winged
words:

"Strangers, who are ye, whence sail ye the wet ways?  Is it after
merchandise, or do ye wander at adventure, over the salt sea, as
sea-robbers use, that roam staking their own lives, and bearing bane to
men of strange speech?  Why sit ye thus adread, not faring forth on the
land, nor slackening the gear of your black ship?  Sure this is the wont
of toilsome mariners, when they come from the deep to the land in their
black ship, foredone with labour, and anon a longing for sweet food
seizes their hearts."

So spake he, and put courage in their breasts, and the leader of the
Cretans answered him, saying:

"Stranger, behold thou art no whit like unto mortal men in shape or
growth, but art a peer of the Immortals, wherefore all hail, and grace be
thine, and all good things at the hands of the Gods.  Tell me then truly
that I may know indeed, what people is this, what land, what mortals
dwell here?  Surely with our thoughts set on another goal we sailed the
great sea to Pylos from Crete, whence we boast our lineage; but now it is
hither that we have come, maugre our wills, with our galley--another path
and other ways--we longing to return, but some God has led us all
unwilling to this place."

Then the far-darting Apollo answered them:

"Strangers, who dwelt aforetime round wooded Cnossus, never again shall
ye return each to his pleasant city and his own house, and his wife, but
here shall ye hold my rich temple, honoured by multitudes of men.  Lo! I
am the son of Zeus, and name myself Apollo, and hither have I brought you
over the great gulf of the sea, with no evil intent.  Nay, here shall ye
possess my rich temple, held highest in honour among all men, and ye
shall know the counsels of the Immortals, by whose will ye shall ever be
held in renown.  But now come, and instantly obey my word.  First lower
the sails, and loose the sheets, and then beach the black ship on the
land, taking forth the wares and gear of the trim galley, and build ye an
altar on the strand of the sea.  Thereon kindle fire, and sprinkle above
in sacrifice the white barley-flour, and thereafter pray, standing around
the altar.  And whereas I first, in the misty sea, sprang aboard the
swift ship in the guise of a dolphin, therefore pray to me as Apollo
Delphinius, while mine shall ever be the Delphian altar seen from afar.
Then take ye supper beside the swift black ship, and pour libations to
the blessed Gods who hold Olympus.  But when ye have dismissed the desire
of sweet food then with me do ye come, singing the Paean, till ye win
that place where ye shall possess the rich temple."

So spake he, while they heard and obeyed eagerly.  First they lowered the
sails, loosing the sheets, and lowering the mast by the forestays, they
laid it in the mast-stead, and themselves went forth on the strand of the
sea.  Then forth from the salt sea to the mainland they dragged the fleet
ship high up on the sands, laying long sleepers thereunder, and they
builded an altar on the sea-strand, and lit fire thereon, scattering
above white barley-flour in sacrifice, and, standing around the altar,
they prayed as the God commanded.  Anon they took supper beside the fleet
black ship, and poured forth libations to the blessed Gods who hold
Olympus.  But when they had dismissed the desire of meat and drink they
set forth on their way, and the Prince Apollo guided them, harp in hand,
and sweetly he harped, faring with high and goodly strides.  Dancing in
his train the Cretans followed to Pytho, and the Paean they were
chanting, the paeans of the Cretans in whose breasts the Muse hath put
honey-sweet song.  All unwearied they strode to the hill, and swiftly
were got to Parnassus and a winsome land, where they were to dwell,
honoured of many among men.

Apollo guided them, and showed his holy shrine and rich temple, and the
spirit was moved in their breasts, and the captain of the Cretans spake,
and asked the God, saying:

"Prince, since thou hast led us far from friends and our own country, for
so it pleases thee, how now shall we live, we pray thee tell us.  This
fair land bears not vines, nor is rich in meadows, wherefrom we might
live well, and minister to men."

Then, smiling, Apollo, the son of Zeus, spoke to them:

"Foolish ones, enduring hearts, who desire cares, and sore toil, and all
straits!  A light word will I speak to you, do ye consider it.  Let each
one of you, knife in right hand, be ever slaughtering sheep that in
abundance shall ever be yours, all the flocks that the renowned tribes of
men bring hither to me.  Yours it is to guard my temple, and receive the
tribes of men that gather hither, doing, above all, as my will enjoins.
But if any vain word be spoken, or vain deed wrought, or violence after
the manner of mortal men, then shall others be your masters, and hold you
in thraldom for ever. {133}  I have spoken all, do thou keep it in thy
heart."

Even so, fare thou well, son of Zeus and Leto, but I shall remember both
thee and another song.



II.  HERMES


Of Hermes sing, O Muse, the son of Zeus and Maia, Lord of Cyllene, and
Arcadia rich in sheep, the fortune-bearing Herald of the Gods, him whom
Maia bore, the fair-tressed nymph, that lay in the arms of Zeus; a
shamefaced nymph was she, shunning the assembly of the blessed Gods,
dwelling within a shadowy cave.  Therein was Cronion wont to embrace the
fair-tressed nymph in the deep of night, when sweet sleep held
white-armed Hera, the immortal Gods knowing it not, nor mortal men.

But when the mind of great Zeus was fulfilled, and over _her_ the tenth
moon stood in the sky, the babe was born to light, and all was made
manifest; yea, then she bore a child of many a wile and cunning counsel,
a robber, a driver of the kine, a captain of raiders, a watcher of the
night, a thief of the gates, who soon should show forth deeds renowned
among the deathless Gods.  Born in the dawn, by midday well he harped,
and in the evening stole the cattle of Apollo the Far-darter, on that
fourth day of the month wherein lady Maia bore him.  Who, when he leaped
from the immortal knees of his mother, lay not long in the sacred cradle,
but sped forth to seek the cattle of Apollo, crossing the threshold of
the high-roofed cave.  There found he a tortoise, and won endless
delight, for lo, it was Hermes that first made of the tortoise a
minstrel.  The creature met him at the outer door, as she fed on the rich
grass in front of the dwelling, waddling along, at sight whereof the luck-
bringing son of Zeus laughed, and straightway spoke, saying:

"Lo, a lucky omen for me, not by me to be mocked!  Hail, darling and
dancer, friend of the feast, welcome art thou! whence gatst thou the gay
garment, a speckled shell, thou, a mountain-dwelling tortoise?  Nay, I
will carry thee within, and a boon shalt thou be to me, not by me to be
scorned, nay, thou shalt first serve my turn.  Best it is to bide at
home, since danger is abroad.  Living shalt thou be a spell against ill
witchery, and dead, then a right sweet music-maker."

[Hermes making the lyre.  Bronze relief in the British Museum (Fourth
Century B.C.): lang136.jpg]

So spake he, and raising in both hands the tortoise, went back within the
dwelling, bearing the glad treasure.  Then he choked the creature, and
with a gouge of grey iron he scooped out the marrow of the hill tortoise.
And as a swift thought wings through the breast of one that crowding
cares are haunting, or as bright glances fleet from the eyes, so swiftly
devised renowned Hermes both deed and word.  He cut to measure stalks of
reed, and fixed them in through holes bored in the stony shell of the
tortoise, and cunningly stretched round it the hide of an ox, and put in
the horns of the lyre, and to both he fitted the bridge, and stretched
seven harmonious chords of sheep-gut. {136}

Then took he his treasure, when he had fashioned it, and touched the
strings in turn with the _plectrum_, and wondrously it sounded under his
hand, and fair sang the God to the notes, improvising his chant as he
played, like lads exchanging taunts at festivals.  Of Zeus Cronides and
fair-sandalled Maia he sang how they had lived in loving dalliance, and
he told out the tale of his begetting, and sang the handmaids and the
goodly halls of the Nymph, and the tripods in the house, and the store of
cauldrons.  So then he sang, but dreamed of other deeds; then bore he the
hollow lyre and laid it in the sacred cradle, then, in longing for flesh
of kine he sped from the fragrant hall to a place of outlook, with such a
design in his heart as reiving men pursue in the dark of night.

The sun had sunk down beneath earth into ocean, with horses and chariot,
when Hermes came running to the shadowy hills of Pieria, where the
deathless kine of the blessed Gods had ever their haunt; there fed they
on the fair unshorn meadows.  From their number did the keen-sighted
Argeiphontes, son of Maia, cut off fifty loud-lowing kine, and drove them
hither and thither over the sandy land, reversing their tracks, and,
mindful of his cunning, confused the hoof-marks, the front behind, the
hind in front, and himself fared down again.  Straightway he wove sandals
on the sea-sand (things undreamed he wrought, works wonderful,
unspeakable) mingling myrtle twigs and tamarisk, then binding together a
bundle of the fresh young wood, he shrewdly fastened it for light sandals
beneath his feet, leaves and all, {138}--brushwood that the renowned
slayer of Argos had plucked on his way from Pieria [being, as he was, in
haste, down the long way].

Then an old man that was labouring a fruitful vineyard, marked the God
faring down to the plain through grassy Onchestus, and to him spoke first
the son of renowned Maia:

"Old man that bowest thy shoulders over thy hoeing, verily thou shalt
have wine enough when all these vines are bearing. . . . See thou, and
see not; hear thou, and hear not; be silent, so long as naught of thine
is harmed."

Therewith he drave on together the sturdy heads of cattle.  And over many
a shadowy hill, and through echoing corries and flowering plains drave
renowned Hermes.  Then stayed for the more part his darkling ally, the
sacred Night, and swiftly came morning when men can work, and sacred
Selene, daughter of Pallas, mighty prince, clomb to a new place of
outlook, and then the strong son of Zeus drave the broad-browed kine of
Phoebus Apollo to the river Alpheius.  Unwearied they came to the high-
roofed stall and the watering-places in front of the fair meadow.  There,
when he had foddered the deep-voiced kine, he herded them huddled
together into the byre, munching lotus and dewy marsh marigold; next
brought he much wood, and set himself to the craft of fire-kindling.
Taking a goodly shoot of the daphne, he peeled it with the knife, fitting
it to his hand, {140} and the hot vapour of smoke arose.  [Lo, it was
Hermes first who gave fire, and the fire-sticks.]  Then took he many dry
faggots, great plenty, and piled them in the trench, and flame began to
break, sending far the breath of burning fire.  And when the force of
renowned Hephaestus kept the fire aflame, then downward dragged he, so
mighty his strength, two bellowing kine of twisted horn: close up to the
fire he dragged them, and cast them both panting upon their backs to the
ground.  [Then bending over them he turned them upwards and cut their
throats] . . . task upon task, and sliced off the fat meat, pierced it
with spits of wood, and broiled it,--flesh, and chine, the joint of
honour, and blood in the bowels, all together;--then laid all there in
its place.  The hides he stretched out on a broken rock, as even now they
are used, such as are to be enduring: long, and long after that ancient
day. {141a}  Anon glad Hermes dragged the fat portions on to a smooth
ledge, and cut twelve messes sorted out by lot, to each its due meed he
gave.  Then a longing for the rite of the sacrifice of flesh came on
renowned Hermes: for the sweet savour irked him, immortal as he was, but
not even so did his strong heart yield. {141b} . . .  The fat and flesh
he placed in the high-roofed stall, the rest he swiftly raised aloft, a
trophy of his reiving, and, gathering dry faggots, he burned heads and
feet entire with the vapour of flame.  Anon when the God had duly
finished all, he cast his sandals into the deep swirling pool of
Alpheius, quenched the embers, and all night long spread smooth the black
dust: Selene lighting him with her lovely light.  Back to the crests of
Cyllene came the God at dawn, nor blessed God, on that long way, nor
mortal man encountered him; nay, and no dog barked.  Then Hermes, son of
Zeus, bearer of boon, bowed his head, and entered the hall through the
hole of the bolt, like mist on the breath of autumn.  Then, standing
erect, he sped to the rich inmost chamber of the cave, lightly treading
noiseless on the floor.  Quickly to his cradle came glorious Hermes and
wrapped the swaddling bands about his shoulders, like a witless babe,
playing with the wrapper about his knees.  So lay he, guarding his dear
lyre at his left hand.  But his Goddess mother the God did not deceive;
she spake, saying:

"Wherefore, thou cunning one, and whence comest thou in the night, thou
clad in shamelessness?  Anon, methinks, thou wilt go forth at Apollo's
hands with bonds about thy sides that may not be broken, sooner than be a
robber in the glens.  Go to, wretch, thy Father begat thee for a trouble
to deathless Gods and mortal men."

But Hermes answered her with words of guile: "Mother mine, why wouldst
thou scare me so, as though I were a redeless child, with little craft in
his heart, a trembling babe that dreads his mother's chidings?  Nay, but
I will essay the wiliest craft to feed thee and me for ever.  We twain
are not to endure to abide here, of all the deathless Gods alone
unapproached with sacrifice and prayer, as thou commandest.  Better it is
eternally to be conversant with Immortals, richly, nobly, well seen in
wealth of grain, than to be homekeepers in a darkling cave.  And for
honour, I too will have my dues of sacrifice, even as Apollo.  Even if my
Father give it me not I will endeavour, for I am of avail, to be a
captain of reivers.  And if the son of renowned Leto make inquest for me,
methinks some worse thing will befall him.  For to Pytho I will go, to
break into his great house, whence I shall sack goodly tripods and
cauldrons enough, and gold, and gleaming iron, and much raiment.  Thyself,
if thou hast a mind, shalt see it."

So held they converse one with another, the son of Zeus of the AEgis, and
Lady Maia.  Then Morning the Daughter of Dawn was arising from the deep
stream of Oceanus, bearing light to mortals, what time Apollo came to
Onchestus in his journeying, the gracious grove, a holy place of the loud
Girdler of the Earth: there he found an old man grazing his ox, the stay
of his vineyard, on the roadside. {144}  Him first bespoke the son of
renowned Leto.

"Old man, hedger of grassy Onchestus; hither am I come seeking cattle
from Pieria, all the crook-horned kine out of my herd: my black bull was
wont to graze apart from the rest, and my four bright-eyed hounds
followed, four of them, wise as men and all of one mind.  These were
left, the hounds and the bull, a marvel; but the kine wandered away from
their soft meadow and sweet pasture, at the going down of the sun.  Tell
me, thou old man of ancient days, if thou hast seen any man faring after
these cattle?"

Then to him the old man spake and answered:

"My friend, hard it were to tell all that a man may see: for many
wayfarers go by, some full of ill intent, and some of good: and it is
difficult to be certain regarding each.  Nevertheless, the whole day long
till sunset I was digging about my vineyard plot, and methought I
marked--but I know not surely--a child that went after the horned kine;
right young he was, and held a staff, and kept going from side to side,
and backwards he drove the kine, their faces fronting him."

So spake the old man, but Apollo heard, and went fleeter on his path.
Then marked he a bird long of wing, and anon he knew that the thief had
been the son of Zeus Cronion.  Swiftly sped the Prince, Apollo, son of
Zeus, to goodly Pylos, seeking the shambling kine, while his broad
shoulders were swathed in purple cloud.  Then the Far-darter marked the
tracks, and spake:

"Verily, a great marvel mine eyes behold!  These be the tracks of high-
horned kine, but all are turned back to the meadow of asphodel.  But
these are not the footsteps of a man, nay, nor of a woman, nor of grey
wolves, nor bears, nor lions, nor, methinks, of a shaggy-maned Centaur,
whosoever with fleet feet makes such mighty strides!  Dread to see they
are that backwards go, more dread they that go forwards."

So speaking, the Prince sped on, Apollo, son of Zeus.  To the Cyllenian
hill he came, that is clad in forests, to the deep shadow of the hollow
rock, where the deathless nymph brought forth the child of Zeus Cronion.
A fragrance sweet was spread about the goodly hill, and many tall sheep
were grazing the grass.  Thence he went fleetly over the stone threshold
into the dusky cave, even Apollo, the Far-darter.

Now when the son of Zeus and Maia beheld Apollo thus in wrath for his
kine, he sank down within his fragrant swaddling bands, being covered as
piled embers of burnt tree-roots are covered by thick ashes, so Hermes
coiled himself up, when he saw the Far-darter; and curled himself, feet,
head, and hands, into small space [summoning sweet sleep], though of a
verity wide awake, and his tortoise-shell he kept beneath his armpit.  But
the son of Zeus and Leto marked them well, the lovely mountain nymph and
her dear son, a little babe, all wrapped in cunning wiles.  Gazing round
all the chamber of the vasty dwelling, Apollo opened three aumbries with
the shining key; full were they of nectar and glad ambrosia, and much
gold and silver lay within, and much raiment of the Nymph, purple and
glistering, such as are within the dwellings of the mighty Gods.  Anon,
when he had searched out the chambers of the great hall, the son of Leto
spake to renowned Hermes:

"Child, in the cradle lying, tell me straightway of my kine: or speedily
between us twain will be unseemly strife.  For I will seize thee and cast
thee into murky Tartarus, into the darkness of doom where none is of
avail.  Nor shall thy father or mother redeem thee to the light: nay,
under earth shalt thou roam, a reiver among folk fordone."

Then Hermes answered with words of craft: "Apollo, what ungentle word
hast thou spoken?  And is it thy cattle of the homestead thou comest here
to seek?  I saw them not, heard not of them, gave ear to no word of them:
of them I can tell no tidings, nor win the fee of him who tells.  Not
like a lifter of cattle, a stalwart man, am I: no task is this of mine:
hitherto I have other cares; sleep, and mother's milk, and about my
shoulders swaddling bands, and warmed baths.  Let none know whence this
feud arose!  And verily great marvel among the Immortals it would be,
that a new-born child should cross the threshold after kine of the
homestead; a silly rede of thine.  Yesterday was I born, my feet are
tender, and rough is the earth below.  But if thou wilt I shall swear the
great oath by my father's head, that neither I myself am to blame, nor
have I seen any other thief of thy kine: be kine what they may, for I
know but by hearsay."

So spake he with twinkling eyes, and twisted brows, glancing hither and
thither, with long-drawn whistling breath, hearing Apollo's word as a
vain thing.  Then lightly laughing spake Apollo the Far-darter:

"Oh, thou rogue, thou crafty one; verily methinks that many a time thou
wilt break into stablished homes, and by night leave many a man bare,
silently pilling through his house, such is thy speech to-day!  And many
herdsmen of the steadings wilt thou vex in the mountain glens, when in
lust for flesh thou comest on the herds and sheep thick of fleece.  Nay
come, lest thou sleep the last and longest slumber, come forth from thy
cradle, thou companion of black night!  For surely this honour hereafter
thou shalt have among the Immortals, to be called for ever the captain of
reivers."

So spake Phoebus Apollo, and lifted the child, but even then strong Argus-
bane had his device, and, in the hands of the God, let forth an Omen, an
evil belly-tenant, with tidings of worse, and a speedy sneeze thereafter.
Apollo heard, and dropped renowned Hermes on the ground, then sat down
before him, eager as he was to be gone, chiding Hermes, and thus he
spoke:

"Take heart, swaddling one, child of Zeus and Maia.  By these thine Omens
shall I find anon the sturdy kine, and thou shalt lead the way."

So spake he, but swiftly arose Cyllenian Hermes, and swiftly fared,
pulling about his ears his swaddling bands that were his shoulder
wrapping.  Then spake he:

"Whither bearest thou me, Far-darter, of Gods most vehement?  Is it for
wrath about thy kine that thou thus provokest me?  Would that the race of
kine might perish, for thy cattle have I not stolen, nor seen another
steal, whatsoever kine may be; I know but by hearsay, I!  But let our
suit be judged before Zeus Cronion."

Now were lone Hermes and the splendid son of Leto point by point
disputing their pleas, Apollo with sure knowledge was righteously seeking
to convict renowned Hermes for the sake of his kine, but he with craft
and cunning words sought to beguile,--the Cyllenian to beguile the God of
the Silver Bow.  But when the wily one found one as wily, then speedily
he strode forward through the sand in front, while behind came the son of
Zeus and Leto.  Swiftly they came to the crests of fragrant Olympus, to
father Cronion they came, these goodly sons of Zeus, for there were set
for them the balances of doom.  Quiet was snowy Olympus, but they who
know not decay or death were gathering after gold-throned Dawn.  Then
stood Hermes and Apollo of the Silver Bow before the knees of Zeus, the
Thunderer, who inquired of his glorious Son, saying:

"Phoebus, whence drivest thou such mighty spoil, a new-born babe like a
Herald?  A mighty matter this, to come before the gathering of the Gods!"

Then answered him the Prince, Apollo the Far-darter:

"Father, anon shalt thou hear no empty tale; tauntest thou me, as though
I were the only lover of booty?  This boy have I found, a finished
reiver, in the hills of Cyllene, a long way to wander; so fine a knave as
I know not among Gods or men, of all robbers on earth.  My kine he stole
from the meadows, and went driving them at eventide along the loud sea
shores, straight to Pylos.  Wondrous were the tracks, a thing to marvel
on, work of a glorious god.  For the black dust showed the tracks of the
kine making backward to the mead of asphodel; but this child intractable
fared neither on hands nor feet, through the sandy land, but this other
strange craft had he, to tread the paths as if shod on with oaken shoots.
{153}  While he drove the kine through a land of sand, right plain to
discern were all the tracks in the dust, but when he had crossed the
great tract of sand, straightway on hard ground his traces and those of
the kine were ill to discern.  But a mortal man beheld him, driving
straight to Pylos the cattle broad of brow.  Now when he had stalled the
kine in quiet, and confused his tracks on either side the way, he lay
dark as night in his cradle, in the dusk of a shadowy cave.  The keenest
eagle could not have spied him, and much he rubbed his eyes, with crafty
purpose, and bluntly spake his word:

"I saw not, I heard not aught, nor learned another's tale; nor tidings
could I give, nor win reward of tidings."

Therewith Phoebus Apollo sat him down, but another tale did Hermes tell,
among the Immortals, addressing Cronion, the master of all Gods:

"Father Zeus, verily the truth will I tell thee: for true am I, nor know
the way of falsehood.  To-day at sunrise came Apollo to our house,
seeking his shambling kine.  No witnesses of the Gods brought he, nor no
Gods who had seen the fact.  But he bade me declare the thing under
duress, threatening oft to cast me into wide Tartarus, for he wears the
tender flower of glorious youth, but I was born but yesterday, as well
himself doth know, and in naught am I like a stalwart lifter of kine.
Believe, for thou givest thyself out to be my father, that may I never be
well if I drove home the kine, nay, or crossed the threshold.  This I say
for sooth!  The Sun I greatly revere, and other gods, and Thee I love,
and _him_ I dread.  Nay, thyself knowest that I am not to blame; and
thereto I will add a great oath: by these fair-wrought porches of the
Gods I am guiltless, and one day yet I shall avenge me on him for this
pitiless accusation, mighty as he is; but do thou aid the younger!"

So spake Cyllenian Argus-bane, and winked, with his wrapping on his arm:
he did not cast it down.  But Zeus laughed aloud at the sight of his evil-
witted child, so well and wittily he pled denial about the kine.  Then
bade he them both be of one mind, and so seek the cattle, with Hermes as
guide to lead the way, and show without guile where he had hidden the
sturdy kine.  The Son of Cronos nodded, and glorious Hermes obeyed, for
lightly persuadeth the counsel of Zeus of the AEgis.

Then sped both of them, the fair children of Zeus, to sandy Pylos, at the
ford of Alpheius, and to the fields they came, and the stall of lofty
roof, where the booty was tended in the season of darkness.  There anon
Hermes went to the side of the rocky cave, and began driving the sturdy
cattle into the light.  But the son of Leto, glancing aside, saw the
flayed skins on the high rock, and quickly asked renowned Hermes:

"How wert thou of avail, oh crafty one, to flay two kine; new-born and
childish as thou art?  For time to come I dread thy might: no need for
thee to be growing long, thou son of Maia!" {156}

[So spake he, and round his hands twisted strong bands of withes, but
they at his feet were soon intertwined, each with other, and lightly were
they woven over all the kine of the field, by the counsel of thievish
Hermes, but Apollo marvelled at that he saw.]

Then the strong Argus-bane with twinkling glances looked down at the
ground, wishful to hide his purpose.  But that harsh son of renowned
Leto, the Far-darter, did he lightly soothe to his will; taking his lyre
in his left hand he tuned it with the _plectrum_: and wondrously it rang
beneath his hand.  Thereat Phoebus Apollo laughed and was glad, and the
winsome note passed through to his very soul as he heard.  Then Maia's
son took courage, and sweetly harping with his harp he stood at Apollo's
left side, playing his prelude, and thereon followed his winsome voice.
He sang the renowns of the deathless Gods, and the dark Earth, how all
things were at the first, and how each God gat his portion.

To Mnemosyne first of Gods he gave the meed of minstrelsy, to the Mother
of the Muses, for the Muse came upon the Son of Maia.

Then all the rest of the Immortals, in order of rank and birth, did he
honour, the splendid son of Zeus, telling duly all the tale, as he struck
the lyre on his arm.  But on Apollo's heart in his breast came the stress
of desire, who spake to him winged words:

"Thou crafty slayer of kine, thou comrade of the feast; thy song is worth
the price of fifty oxen!  Henceforth, methinks, shall we be peacefully
made at one.  But, come now, tell me this, thou wily Son of Maia, have
these marvels been with thee even since thy birth, or is it that some
immortal, or some mortal man, has given thee the glorious gift and shown
thee song divine?  For marvellous is this new song in mine ears, such as,
methinks, none hath known, either of men, or of Immortals who have
mansions in Olympus, save thyself, thou reiver, thou Son of Zeus and
Maia!  What art is this, what charm against the stress of cares?  What a
path of song! for verily here is choice of all three things, joy, and
love, and sweet sleep.  For truly though I be conversant with the
Olympian Muses, to whom dances are a charge, and the bright minstrel
hymn, and rich song, and the lovesome sound of flutes, yet never yet hath
aught else been so dear to my heart, dear as the skill in the festivals
of the Gods.  I marvel, Son of Zeus, at this, the music of thy
minstrelsy.  But now since, despite thy youth, thou hast such glorious
skill, to thee and to thy Mother I speak this word of sooth: verily, by
this shaft of cornel wood, I shall lead thee renowned and fortunate among
the Immortals, and give thee glorious gifts, nor in the end deceive
thee."

Then Hermes answered him with cunning words:

"Shrewdly thou questionest me, Far-darter, nor do I grudge thee to enter
upon mine art.  This day shalt thou know it: and to thee would I fain be
kind in word and will: but within thyself thou well knowest all things,
for first among the Immortals, Son of Zeus, is thy place.  Mighty art
thou and strong, and Zeus of wise counsels loves thee well with reverence
due, and hath given thee honour and goodly gifts.  Nay, they tell that
thou knowest soothsaying, Far-darter, by the voice of Zeus: for from Zeus
are all oracles, wherein I myself now know thee to be all-wise.  Thy
province it is to know what so thou wilt.  Since, then, thy heart bids
thee play the lyre, harp thou and sing, and let joys be thy care, taking
this gift from me; and to me, friend, gain glory.  Sweetly sing with my
shrill comrade in thy hands, that knoweth speech good and fair and in
order due.  Freely do thou bear it hereafter into the glad feast, and the
winsome dance, and the glorious revel, a joy by night and day.  Whatsoever
skilled hand shall inquire of it artfully and wisely, surely its voice
shall teach him all things joyous, being easily played by gentle
practice, fleeing dull toil.  But if an unskilled hand first impetuously
inquires of it, vain and discordant shall the false notes sound.  But
thine it is of nature to know what things thou wilt: so to thee will I
give this lyre, thou glorious son of Zeus.  But we for our part will let
graze thy cattle of the field on the pastures of hill and plain, thou Far-
darter.  So shall the kine, consorting with the bulls, bring forth calves
male and female, great store, and no need there is that thou, wise as
thou art, should be vehement in anger."

So spake he, and held forth the lyre that Phoebus Apollo took, and
pledged his shining whip in the hands of Hermes, and set him over the
herds.  Gladly the son of Maia received it; while the glorious son of
Leto, Apollo, the Prince, the Far-darter, held the lyre in his left hand,
and tuned it orderly with the _plectrum_.  Sweetly it sounded to his
hand, and fair thereto was the song of the God.  Thence anon the twain
turned the kine to the rich meadow, but themselves, the glorious children
of Zeus, hastened back to snow-clad Olympus, rejoicing in the lyre: ay,
and Zeus, the counsellor, was glad of it.  [Both did he make one in love,
and Hermes loved Leto's son constantly, even as now, since when in
knowledge of his love he pledged to the Far-darter the winsome lyre, who
held it on his arm and played thereon.]  But Hermes withal invented the
skill of a new art, the far-heard music of the reed pipes.

Then spake the son of Leto to Hermes thus:

"I fear me, Son of Maia, thou leader, thou crafty one, lest thou steal
from me both my lyre and my bent bow.  For this meed thou hast from Zeus,
to establish the ways of barter among men on the fruitful earth.
Wherefore would that thou shouldst endure to swear me the great oath of
the Gods, with a nod of the head or by the showering waters of Styx, that
thy doings shall ever to my heart be kind and dear."

Then, with a nod of his head, did Maia's son vow that never would he
steal the possessions of the Far-darter, nor draw nigh his strong
dwelling.  And Leto's son made vow and band of love and alliance, that
none other among the Gods should be dearer of Gods or men the seed of
Zeus.  [And I shall make, with thee, a perfect token of a Covenant of all
Gods and all men, loyal to my heart and honoured.] {162a}  "Thereafter
shall I give thee a fair wand of wealth and fortune, a golden wand, three-
pointed, which shall guard thee harmless, accomplishing all things good
of word and deed that it is mine to learn from the voice of Zeus. {162b}
But as touching the art prophetic, oh best of fosterlings of Zeus,
concerning which thou inquirest, for thee it is not fit to learn that
art, nay, nor for any other Immortal.  That lies in the mind of Zeus
alone.  Myself did make pledge, and promise, and strong oath, that, save
me, none other of the eternal Gods should know the secret counsel of
Zeus.  And thou, my brother of the Golden Wand, bid me not tell thee what
awful purposes is planning the far-seeing Zeus.

"One mortal shall I harm, and another shall I bless, with many a turn of
fortune among hapless men.  Of mine oracle shall he have profit whosoever
comes in the wake of wings and voice of birds of omen: he shall have
profit of mine oracle: him I will not deceive.  But whoso, trusting birds
not ominous, approaches mine oracle, to inquire beyond my will, and know
more than the eternal Gods, shall come, I say, on a bootless journey, yet
his gifts shall I receive.  Yet another thing will I tell thee, thou Son
of renowned Maia and of Zeus of the AEgis, thou bringer of boon; there be
certain Thriae, sisters born, three maidens rejoicing in swift wings.
Their heads are sprinkled with white barley flour, and they dwell beneath
a glade of Parnassus, apart they dwell, teachers of soothsaying.  This
art I learned while yet a boy I tended the kine, and my Father heeded
not.  Thence they flit continually hither and thither, feeding on
honeycombs and bringing all things to fulfilment.  They, when they are
full of the spirit of soothsaying, having eaten of the wan honey, delight
to speak forth the truth.  But if they be bereft of the sweet food
divine, then lie they all confusedly.  These I bestow on thee, and do
thou, inquiring clearly, delight thine own heart, and if thou instruct
any man, he will often hearken to thine oracle, if he have the good
fortune. {164}  These be thine, O Son of Maia, and the cattle of the
field with twisted horn do thou tend, and horses, and toilsome mules. . . .
And be lord over the burning eyes of lions, and white-toothed swine,
and dogs, and sheep that wide earth nourishes, and over all flocks be
glorious Hermes lord.  And let him alone be herald appointed to Hades,
who, though he be giftless, will give him highest gift of honour."

With such love, in all kindness, did Apollo pledge the Son of Maia, and
thereto Cronion added grace.  With all mortals and immortals he consorts.
Somewhat doth he bless, but ever through the dark night he beguiles the
tribes of mortal men.

Hail to thee thus, Son of Zeus and Maia, of thee shall I be mindful and
of another lay.



III.  APHRODITE


Tell me, Muse, of the deeds of golden Aphrodite, the Cyprian, who rouses
sweet desire among the Immortals, and vanquishes the tribes of deathly
men, and birds that wanton in the air, and all beasts, even all the clans
that earth nurtures, and all in the sea.  To all are dear the deeds of
the garlanded Cyprian.

[Aphrodite.  Marble statue in the Louvre: lang166.jpg]

Yet three hearts there be that she cannot persuade or beguile: the
daughter of Zeus of the AEgis, grey-eyed Athene: not to her are dear the
deeds of golden Aphrodite, but war and the work of Ares, battle and
broil, and the mastery of noble arts.  First was she to teach earthly men
the fashioning of war chariots and cars fair-wrought with bronze.  And
she teaches to tender maidens in the halls all goodly arts, breathing
skill into their minds.  Nor ever doth laughter-loving Aphrodite conquer
in desire Artemis of the Golden Distaff, rejoicing in the sound of the
chase, for the bow and arrow are her delight, and slaughter of the wild
beasts on the hills: the lyre, the dance, the clear hunting halloo, and
shadowy glens, and cities of righteous men.

Nor to the revered maiden Hestia are the feats of Aphrodite a joy, eldest
daughter of crooked-counselled Cronos [youngest, too, by the design of
Zeus of the AEgis], that lady whom both Poseidon and Apollo sought to
win.  But she would not, nay stubbornly she refused; and she swore a
great oath fulfilled, with her hand on the head of Father Zeus of the
AEgis, to be a maiden for ever, that lady Goddess.  And to her Father
Zeus gave a goodly meed of honour, in lieu of wedlock; and in mid-hall
she sat her down choosing the best portion: and in all temples of the
Gods is she honoured, and among all mortals is chief of Gods. {168}

Of these she cannot win or beguile the hearts.  But of all others there
is none, of blessed Gods or mortal men, that hath escaped Aphrodite.  Yea,
even the heart of Zeus the Thunderer she led astray; of him that is
greatest of all, and hath the highest lot of honour.  Even his wise wit
she hath beguiled at her will, and lightly laid him in the arms of mortal
women; Hera not wotting of it, his sister and his wife, the fairest in
goodliness of beauty among the deathless Goddesses.  To highest honour
did they beget her, crooked-counselled Cronos and Mother Rheia; and Zeus
of imperishable counsel made her his chaste and duteous wife.

But into Aphrodite herself Zeus sent sweet desire, to lie in the arms of
a mortal man.  This wrought he so that anon not even she might be
unconversant with a mortal bed, and might not some day with sweet
laughter make her boast among all the Gods, the smiling Aphrodite, that
she had given the Gods to mortal paramours, and they for deathless Gods
bare deathly sons, and that she mingled Goddesses in love with mortal
men.  Therefore Zeus sent into her heart sweet desire of Anchises, who as
then was pasturing his kine on the steep hills of many-fountained Ida, a
man in semblance like the Immortals.  Him thereafter did smiling
Aphrodite see and love, and measureless desire took hold on her heart.  To
Cyprus wended she, within her fragrant shrine: even to Paphos, where is
her sacred garth and odorous altar.  Thither went she in, and shut the
shining doors, and there the Graces laved and anointed her with oil
ambrosial, such as is on the bodies of the eternal Gods, sweet fragrant
oil that she had by her.  Then clad she her body in goodly raiment, and
prinked herself with gold, the smiling Aphrodite; then sped to Troy,
leaving fragrant Cyprus, and high among the clouds she swiftly
accomplished her way.

To many-fountained Ida she came, mother of wild beasts, and made straight
for the steading through the mountain, while behind her came fawning the
beasts, grey wolves, and lions fiery-eyed, and bears, and swift pards,
insatiate pursuers of the roe-deer.  Glad was she at the sight of them,
and sent desire into their breasts, and they went coupling two by two in
the shadowy dells.  But she came to the well-builded shielings, {170} and
him she found left alone in the shielings with no company, the hero
Anchises, graced with beauty from the Gods.  All the rest were faring
after the kine through the grassy pastures, but he, left lonely at the
shielings, walked up and down, harping sweet and shrill.  In front of him
stood the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, in semblance and stature like an
unwedded maid, lest he should be adread when he beheld the Goddess.  And
Anchises marvelled when he beheld her, her height, and beauty, and
glistering raiment.  For she was clad in vesture more shining than the
flame of fire, and with twisted armlets and glistering earrings of flower-
fashion.  About her delicate neck were lovely jewels, fair and golden:
and like the moon's was the light on her fair breasts, and love came upon
Anchises, and he spake unto her:

"Hail, Queen, whosoever of the Immortals thou art that comest to this
house; whether Artemis, or Leto, or golden Aphrodite, or high-born
Themis, or grey-eyed Athene.  Or perchance thou art one of the Graces
come hither, who dwell friendly with the Gods, and have a name to be
immortal; or of the nymphs that dwell in this fair glade, or in this fair
mountain, and in the well-heads of rivers, and in grassy dells.  But to
thee on some point of outlook, in a place far seen, will I make an altar,
and offer to thee goodly victims in every season.  But for thy part be
kindly, and grant me to be a man pre-eminent among the Trojans, and give
goodly seed of children to follow me; but for me, let me live long, and
see the sunlight, and come to the limit of old age, being ever in all
things fortunate among men."

Then Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus answered him:

"Anchises, most renowned of men on earth, behold no Goddess am I,--why
likenest thou me to the Immortals?--Nay, mortal am I, and a mortal mother
bare me, and my father is famous Otreus, if thou perchance hast heard of
him, who reigns over strong-warded Phrygia.  Now I well know both your
tongue and our own, for a Trojan nurse reared me in the hall, and
nurtured me ever, from the day when she took me at my mother's hands, and
while I was but a little child.  Thus it is, thou seest, that I well know
thy tongue as well as my own.  But even now the Argus-slayer of the
Golden Wand hath ravished me away from the choir of Artemis, the Goddess
of the Golden Distaff, who loves the noise of the chase.  Many nymphs,
and maids beloved of many wooers, were we there at play, and a great
circle of people was about us withal.  But thence did he bear me away,
the Argus-slayer, he of the Golden Wand, and bore me over much tilled
land of mortal men, and many wastes unfilled and uninhabited, where wild
beasts roam through the shadowy dells.  So fleet we passed that I seemed
not to touch the fertile earth with my feet.  Now Hermes said that I was
bidden to be the bride of Anchises, and mother of thy goodly children.
But when he had spoken and shown the thing, lo, instantly he went back
among the immortal Gods,--the renowned Slayer of Argus.  But I come to
thee, strong necessity being laid upon me, and by Zeus I beseech thee and
thy good parents,--for none ill folk may get such a son as thee,--by them
I implore thee to take me, a maiden as I am and untried in love, and show
me to thy father and thy discreet mother, and to thy brothers of one
lineage with thee.  No unseemly daughter to these, and sister to those
will I be, but well worthy; and do thou send a messenger swiftly to the
Phrygians of the dappled steeds, to tell my father of my fortunes, and my
sorrowing mother; gold enough and woven raiment will they send, and many
and goodly gifts shall be thy meed.  Do thou all this, and then busk the
winsome wedding-feast, that is honourable among both men and immortal
Gods."

So speaking, the Goddess brought sweet desire into his heart, and love
came upon Anchises, and he spake, and said:

"If indeed thou art mortal and a mortal mother bore thee, and if renowned
Otreus is thy father, and if thou art come hither by the will of Hermes,
the immortal Guide, and art to be called my wife for ever, then neither
mortal man nor immortal God shall hold me from my desire before I lie
with thee in love, now and anon; nay, not even if Apollo the Far-darter
himself were to send the shafts of sorrow from the silver bow!  Nay, thou
lady like the Goddesses, willing were I to go down within the house of
Hades, if but first I had climbed into thy bed."

So spake he and took her hand; while laughter-loving Aphrodite turned,
and crept with fair downcast eyes towards the bed.  It was strewn for the
Prince, as was of wont, with soft garments: and above it lay skins of
bears and deep-voiced lions that he had slain in the lofty hills.  When
then they twain had gone up into the well-wrought bed, first Anchises
took from her body her shining jewels, brooches, and twisted armlets,
earrings and chains: and he loosed her girdle, and unclad her of her
glistering raiment, that he laid on a silver-studded chair.  Then through
the Gods' will and design, by the immortal Goddess lay the mortal man,
not wotting what he did.

Now in the hour when herdsmen drive back the kine and sturdy sheep to the
steading from the flowery pastures, even then the Goddess poured sweet
sleep into Anchises, and clad herself in her goodly raiment.  Now when
she was wholly clad, the lady Goddess, her head touched the beam of the
lofty roof: and from her cheeks shone forth immortal beauty,--even the
beauty of fair-garlanded Cytherea.  Then she aroused him from sleep, and
spake, and said:

"Rise, son of Dardanus, why now slumberest thou so deeply?  Consider, am
I even in aspect such as I was when first thine eyes beheld me?"

So spake she, and straightway he started up out of slumber and was
adread, and turned his eyes away when he beheld the neck and the fair
eyes of Aphrodite.  His goodly face he veiled again in a cloak, and
imploring her, he spake winged words:

"Even so soon as mine eyes first beheld thee, Goddess, I knew thee for
divine: but not sooth didst thou speak to me.  But by Zeus of the AEgis I
implore thee, suffer me not to live a strengthless shadow among men, but
pity me: for no man lives in strength that has couched with immortal
Goddesses."

Then answered him Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus:

"Anchises, most renowned of mortal men, take courage, nor fear overmuch.
For no fear is there that thou shalt suffer scathe from me, nor from
others of the blessed Gods, for dear to the Gods art thou.  And to thee
shall a dear son be born, and bear sway among the Trojans, and children's
children shall arise after him continually.  Lo, AENEAS shall his name be
called, since dread sorrow held me when I came into the bed of a mortal
man.  And of all mortal men these who spring from thy race are always
nearest to the immortal Gods in beauty and stature; witness how
wise-counselling Zeus carried away golden-haired Ganymedes, for his
beauty's sake, that he might abide with the Immortals and be the
cup-bearer of the Gods in the house of Zeus, a marvellous thing to
behold, a mortal honoured among all the Immortals, as he draws the red
nectar from the golden mixing-bowl.  But grief incurable possessed the
heart of Tros, nor knew he whither the wild wind had blown his dear son
away, therefore day by day he lamented him continually till Zeus took
pity upon him, and gave him as a ransom of his son high-stepping horses
that bear the immortal Gods.  These he gave him for a gift, and the
Guide, the Slayer of Argus, told all these things by the command of Zeus,
even how Ganymedes should be for ever exempt from old age and death, even
as are the Gods.  Now when his father heard this message of Zeus he
rejoiced in his heart and lamented no longer, but was gladly charioted by
the wind-fleet horses.

"So too did Dawn of the Golden Throne carry off Tithonus, a man of your
lineage, one like unto the Immortals.  Then went she to pray to Cronion,
who hath dark clouds for his tabernacle, that her lover might be immortal
and exempt from death for ever.  Thereto Zeus consented and granted her
desire, but foolish of heart was the Lady Dawn, nor did she deem it good
to ask for eternal youth for her lover, and to keep him unwrinkled by
grievous old age.  Now so long as winsome youth was his, in joy did he
dwell with the Golden-throned Dawn, the daughter of Morning, at the
world's end beside the streams of Oceanus, but so soon as grey hairs
began to flow from his fair head and goodly chin, the Lady Dawn held
aloof from his bed, but kept and cherished him in her halls, giving him
food and ambrosia and beautiful raiment.  But when hateful old age had
utterly overcome him, and he could not move or lift his limbs, to her
this seemed the wisest counsel; she laid him in a chamber, and shut the
shining doors, and his voice flows on endlessly, and no strength now is
his such as once there was in his limbs.  Therefore I would not have thee
to be immortal and live for ever in such fashion among the deathless
Gods, but if, being such as thou art in beauty and form, thou couldst
live on, and be called my lord, then this grief would not overshadow my
heart.

"But it may not be, for swiftly will pitiless old age come upon thee, old
age that standeth close by mortal men; wretched and weary, and detested
by the Gods: but among the immortal Gods shall great blame be mine for
ever, and all for love of thee.  For the Gods were wont to dread my words
and wiles wherewith I had subdued all the Immortals to mortal women in
love, my purpose overcoming them all; for now, lo you, my mouth will no
longer suffice to speak forth this boast among the Immortals, {180} for
deep and sore hath been my folly, wretched and not to be named; and
distraught have I been who carry a child beneath my girdle, the child of
a mortal.  Now so soon as he sees the light of the sun the deep-bosomed
mountain nymphs will rear him for me; the nymphs who haunt this great and
holy mountain, being of the clan neither of mortals nor of immortal Gods.
Long is their life, and immortal food do they eat, and they join in the
goodly dance with the immortal Gods.  With them the Sileni and the keen-
sighted Slayer of Argus live in dalliance in the recesses of the darkling
caves.  At their birth there sprang up pine trees or tall-crested oaks on
the fruitful earth, nourishing and fair, and on the lofty mountain they
stand, and are called the groves of the immortal Gods, which in no wise
doth man cut down with the steel.  But when the fate of death approaches,
first do the fair trees wither on the ground, and the bark about them
moulders, and the twigs fall down, and even as the tree perishes so the
soul of the nymph leaves the light of the sun.

"These nymphs will keep my child with them and rear him; and him when
first he enters on lovely youth shall these Goddesses bring hither to
thee, and show thee.  But to thee, that I may tell thee all my mind, will
I come in the fifth year bringing my son.  At the sight of him thou wilt
be glad when thou beholdest him with thine eyes, for he will be divinely
fair, and thou wilt lead him straightway to windy Ilios.  But if any
mortal man asketh of thee what mother bare this thy dear son, be mindful
to answer him as I command: say that he is thy son by one of the flower-
faced nymphs who dwell in this forest-clad mountain, but if in thy folly
thou speakest out, and boastest to have been the lover of fair-garlanded
Cytherea, then Zeus in his wrath will smite thee with the smouldering
thunderbolt.  Now all is told to thee: do thou be wise, and keep thy
counsel, and speak not my name, but revere the wrath of the Gods."

So spake she, and soared up into the windy heaven.

Goddess, Queen of well-stablished Cyprus, having given thee honour due, I
shall pass on to another hymn.



IV.  HYMN TO DEMETER


[Syracusan medallion by Euainetos.  Obv.  Head of Persephone.  Rev.
Victorious Chariot: lang183.jpg]

Of fair-tressed Demeter, Demeter holy Goddess, I begin to sing: of her
and her slim-ankled daughter whom Hades snatched away, the gift of wide-
beholding Zeus, but Demeter knew it not, she that bears the Seasons, the
giver of goodly crops.  For her daughter was playing with the
deep-bosomed maidens of Oceanus, and was gathering flowers--roses, and
crocuses, and fair violets in the soft meadow, and lilies, and hyacinths,
and the narcissus which the earth brought forth as a snare to the fair-
faced maiden, by the counsel of Zeus and to pleasure the Lord with many
guests.  Wondrously bloomed the flower, a marvel for all to see, whether
deathless gods or deathly men.  From its root grew forth a hundred
blossoms, and with its fragrant odour the wide heaven above and the whole
earth laughed, and the salt wave of the sea.  Then the maiden marvelled,
and stretched forth both her hands to seize the fair plaything, but the
wide-wayed earth gaped in the Nysian plain, and up rushed the Prince, the
host of many guests, the many-named son of Cronos, with his immortal
horses.  Maugre her will he seized her, and drave her off weeping in his
golden chariot, but she shrilled aloud, calling on Father Cronides, the
highest of gods and the best.

But no immortal god or deathly man heard the voice of her, . . . save the
daughter of Persaeus, Hecate of the shining head-tire, as she was
thinking delicate thoughts, who heard the cry from her cave [and Prince
Helios, the glorious son of Hyperion], the maiden calling on Father
Cronides.  But he far off sat apart from the gods in his temple haunted
by prayers, receiving goodly victims from mortal men.  By the design of
Zeus did the brother of Zeus lead the maiden away, the lord of many, the
host of many guests, with his deathless horses; right sore against her
will, even he of many names the son of Cronos.  Now, so long as the
Goddess beheld the earth, and the starry heaven, and the tide of the
teeming sea, and the rays of the sun, and still hoped to behold her
mother dear, and the tribes of the eternal gods; even so long, despite
her sorrow, hope warmed her high heart; then rang the mountain peaks, and
the depths of the sea to her immortal voice, and her lady mother heard
her.  Then sharp pain caught at her heart, and with her hands she tore
the wimple about her ambrosial hair, and cast a dark veil about her
shoulders, and then sped she like a bird over land and sea in her great
yearning; but to her there was none that would tell the truth, none,
either of Gods, or deathly men, nor even a bird came nigh her, a
soothsaying messenger.  Thereafter for nine days did Lady Deo roam the
earth, with torches burning in her hands, nor ever in her sorrow tasted
she of ambrosia and sweet nectar, nor laved her body in the baths.  But
when at last the tenth morn came to her with the light, Hecate met her, a
torch in her hands, and spake a word of tidings, and said:

"Lady Demeter, thou that bringest the Seasons, thou giver of glad gifts,
which of the heavenly gods or deathly men hath ravished away Persephone,
and brought thee sorrow: for I heard a voice but I saw not who the
ravisher might be?  All this I say to thee for sooth."

So spake Hecate, and the daughter of fair-tressed Rheie answered her not,
but swiftly rushed on with her, bearing torches burning in her hands.  So
came they to Helios that watches both for gods and men, and stood before
his car, and the lady Goddess questioned him:

"Helios, be pitiful on me that am a goddess, if ever by word or deed I
gladdened thy heart.  My daughter, whom I bore, a sweet plant and fair to
see; it was her shrill voice I heard through the air unharvested, even as
of one violently entreated, but I saw her not with my eyes.  But do thou
that lookest down with thy rays from the holy air upon all the land and
sea, do thou tell me truly concerning my dear child, if thou didst behold
her; who it is that hath gone off and ravished her away from me against
her will, who is it of gods or mortal men?"

So spake she, and Hyperionides answered her:

"Daughter of fair-tressed Rheia, Queen Demeter, thou shalt know it; for
greatly do I pity and revere thee in thy sorrow for thy slim-ankled
child.  There is none other guilty of the Immortals but Zeus himself that
gathereth the clouds, who gave thy daughter to Hades, his own brother, to
be called his lovely wife; and Hades has ravished her away in his
chariot, loudly shrilling, beneath the dusky gloom.  But, Goddess, do
thou cease from thy long lamenting.  It behoves not thee thus vainly to
cherish anger unassuaged.  No unseemly lord for thy daughter among the
Immortals is Aidoneus, the lord of many, thine own brother and of one
seed with thee, and for his honour he won, since when was made the
threefold division, to be lord among those with whom he dwells."

So spake he, and called upon his horses, and at his call they swiftly
bore the fleet chariot on like long-winged birds.  But grief more dread
and bitter fell upon her, and wroth thereafter was she with Cronion that
hath dark clouds for his dwelling.  She held apart from the gathering of
the Gods and from tall Olympus, and disfiguring her form for many days
she went among the cities and rich fields of men.  Now no man knew her
that looked on her, nor no deep-bosomed woman, till she came to the
dwelling of Celeus, who then was Prince of fragrant Eleusis.  There sat
she at the wayside in sorrow of heart, by the Maiden Well whence the
townsfolk were wont to draw water.  In the shade she sat; above her grew
a thick olive-tree; and in fashion she was like an ancient crone who
knows no more of child-bearing and the gifts of Aphrodite, the lover of
garlands.  Such she was as are the nurses of the children of
doom-pronouncing kings.  Such are the housekeepers in their echoing
halls.

Now the daughters of Celeus beheld her as they came to fetch the fair-
flowing water, to carry thereof in bronze vessels to their father's home.
Four were they, like unto goddesses, all in the bloom of youth,
Callidice, and Cleisidice, and winsome Demo, and Callithoe the eldest of
them all, nor did they know her, for the Gods are hard to be known by
mortals, but they stood near her and spake winged words:

"Who art thou and whence, old woman, of ancient folk, and why wert thou
wandering apart from the town, nor dost draw nigh to the houses where are
women of thine own age, in the shadowy halls, even such as thou, and
younger women, too, who may kindly entreat thee in word and deed?"

So spake they, and the lady Goddess answered:

"Dear children, whoever ye be, of womankind I bid you hail, and I will
tell you my story.  Seemly it is to answer your questions truly.  Deo is
my name that my lady mother gave me; but now, look you, from Crete am I
come hither over the wide ridges of the sea, by no will of my own, nay,
by violence have sea-rovers brought me hither under duress, who
thereafter touched with their swift ship at Thoricos where the women and
they themselves embarked on land.  Then were they busy about supper
beside the hawsers of the ship, but my heart heeded not delight of
supper; no, stealthily setting forth through the dark land I fled from
these overweening masters, that they might not sell me whom they had
never bought and gain my price.  Thus hither have I come in my wandering,
nor know I at all what land is this, nor who they be that dwell therein.
But to you may all they that hold mansions in Olympus give husbands and
lords, and such children to bear as parents desire; but me do ye maidens
pity in your kindness, till I come to the house of woman or of man, that
there I may work zealously for them in such tasks as fit a woman of my
years.  I could carry in mine arms a new-born babe, and nurse it well,
and keep the house, and strew my master's bed within the well-builded
chambers, and teach the maids their tasks."

So spake the Goddess, and straightway answered her the maid unwed,
Callidice, the fairest of the daughters of Celeus:

"Mother, what things soever the Gods do give must men, though sorrowing,
endure, for the Gods are far stronger than we; but this will I tell thee
clearly and soothly, namely, what men they are who here have most honour,
and who lead the people, and by their counsels and just dooms do
safeguard the bulwarks of the city.  Such are wise Triptolemus, Diocles,
Polyxenus, and noble Eumolpus, and Dolichus, and our lordly father.  All
their wives keep their houses, and not one of them would at first sight
contemn thee and thrust thee from their halls, but gladly they will
receive thee: for thine aspect is divine.  So, if thou wilt, abide here,
that we may go to the house of my father, and tell out all this tale to
my mother, the deep-bosomed Metaneira, if perchance she will bid thee
come to our house and not seek the homes of others.  A dear son born in
her later years is nurtured in the well-builded hall, a child of many
prayers and a welcome.  If thou wouldst nurse him till he comes to the
measure of youth, then whatsoever woman saw thee should envy thee; such
gifts of fosterage would my mother give thee."

So spake she and the Goddess nodded assent.  So rejoicing they filled
their shining pitchers with water and bore them away.  Swiftly they came
to the high hall of their father, and quickly they told their mother what
they had heard and seen, and speedily she bade them run and call the
strange woman, offering goodly hire.  Then as deer or calves in the
season of Spring leap along the meadow, when they have had their fill of
pasture, so lightly they kilted up the folds of their lovely kirtles, and
ran along the hollow chariot-way, while their hair danced on their
shoulders, in colour like the crocus flower.  They found the glorious
Goddess at the wayside, even where they had left her, and anon they led
her to their father's house.  But she paced behind in heaviness of heart,
her head veiled, and the dark robe floating about her slender feet
divine.  Speedily they came to the house of Celeus, the fosterling of
Zeus, and they went through the corridor where their lady mother was
sitting by the doorpost of the well-wrought hall, with her child in her
lap, a young blossom, and the girls ran up to her, but the Goddess stood
on the threshold, her head touching the roof-beam, and she filled the
doorway with the light divine.  Then wonder, and awe, and pale fear
seized the mother, and she gave place from her high seat, and bade the
Goddess be seated.  But Demeter the bearer of the Seasons, the Giver of
goodly gifts, would not sit down upon the shining high seat.  Nay, in
silence she waited, casting down her lovely eyes, till the wise Iambe set
for her a well-made stool, and cast over it a glistering fleece. {194}
Then sat she down and held the veil before her face; long in sorrow and
silence sat she so, and spake to no man nor made any sign, but smileless
she sat, nor tasted meat nor drink, wasting with long desire for her deep-
bosomed daughter.

So abode she till wise Iambe with jests and many mockeries beguiled the
lady, the holy one, to smile and laugh and hold a happier heart, and
pleased her moods even thereafter.  Then Metaneira filled a cup of sweet
wine and offered it to her, but she refused it, saying, that it was not
permitted for her to drink red wine; but she bade them mix meal and water
with the tender herb of mint, and give it to her to drink.  Then
Metaneira made a potion and gave it to the Goddess as she bade, and Lady
Deo took it and made libation, and to them fair-girdled Metaneira said:

"Hail, lady, for methinks thou art not of mean parentage, but goodly
born, for grace and honour shine in thine eyes as in the eyes of doom-
dealing kings.  But the gifts of the Gods, even in sorrow, we men of
necessity endure, for the yoke is laid upon our necks; yet now that thou
art come hither, such things as I have shall be thine.  Rear me this
child that the Gods have given in my later years and beyond my hope; and
he is to me a child of many prayers.  If thou rear him, and he come to
the measure of youth, verily each woman that sees thee will envy thee,
such shall be my gifts of fosterage."

Then answered her again Demeter of the fair garland:

"And mayst thou too, lady, fare well, and the Gods give thee all things
good.  Gladly will I receive thy child that thou biddest me nurse.  Never,
methinks, by the folly of his nurse shall charm or sorcery harm him; for
I know an antidote stronger than the wild wood herb, and a goodly salve I
know for the venomed spells."

So spake she, and with her immortal hands she placed the child on her
fragrant breast, and the mother was glad at heart.  So in the halls she
nursed the goodly son of wise Celeus, even Demophoon, whom deep-breasted
Metaneira bare, and he grew like a god, upon no mortal food, nor on no
mother's milk.  For Demeter anointed him with ambrosia as though he had
been a son of a God, breathing sweetness over him, and keeping him in her
bosom.  So wrought she by day, but at night she was wont to hide him in
the force of fire like a brand, his dear parents knowing it not. {196}
Nay, to them it was great marvel how flourished he and grew like the Gods
to look upon.  And, verily, she would have made him exempt from eld and
death for ever, had not fair-girdled Metaneira, in her witlessness, spied
on her in the night from her fragrant chamber.  Then wailed she, and
smote both her thighs, in terror for her child, and in anguish of heart,
and lamenting she spake winged words: "My child Demophoon, the stranger
is concealing thee in the heart of the fire; bitter sorrow for me and
lamentation."

So spake she, wailing, and the lady Goddess heard her.  Then in wrath did
the fair-garlanded Demeter snatch out of the fire with her immortal hands
and cast upon the ground that woman's dear son, whom beyond all hope she
had borne in the halls.  Dread was the wrath of Demeter, and anon she
spake to fair-girdled Metaneira.  "Oh redeless and uncounselled race of
men, that know not beforehand the fate of coming good or coming evil.
For, lo, thou hast wrought upon thyself a bane incurable, by thine own
witlessness; for by the oath of the Gods, the relentless water of Styx, I
would have made thy dear child deathless and exempt from age for ever,
and would have given him glory imperishable.  But now in nowise may he
escape the Fates and death, yet glory imperishable will ever be his,
since he has lain on my knees and slept within my arms; [but as the years
go round, and in his day, the sons of the Eleusinians will ever wage war
and dreadful strife one upon the other.]  Now I am the honoured Demeter,
the greatest good and gain of the Immortals to deathly men.  But, come
now, let all the people build me a great temple and an altar thereby,
below the town, and the steep wall, above Callichorus on the jutting
rock.  But the rites I myself will prescribe, that in time to come ye may
pay them duly and appease my power."

Therewith the Goddess changed her shape and height, and cast off old age,
and beauty breathed about her, and the sweet scent was breathed from her
fragrant robes, and afar shone the light from the deathless body of the
Goddess, the yellow hair flowing about her shoulders, so that the goodly
house was filled with the splendour as of levin fire, and forth from the
halls went she.

But anon the knees of the woman were loosened, and for long time she was
speechless, nay, nor did she even mind of the child, her best beloved, to
lift him from the floor.  But the sisters of the child heard his pitiful
cry, and leapt from their fair-strewn beds; one of them, lifting the
child in her hands, laid it in her bosom; and another lit fire, and the
third ran with smooth feet to take her mother forth from the fragrant
chamber.  Then gathered they about the child, and bathed and clad him
lovingly, yet his mood was not softened, for meaner nurses now and
handmaids held him.

They the long night through were adoring the renowned Goddess, trembling
with fear, but at the dawning they told truly to mighty Celeus all that
the Goddess had commanded; even Demeter of the goodly garland.  Thereon
he called into the market-place the many people, and bade them make a
rich temple, and an altar to fair-tressed Demeter, upon the jutting rock.
Then anon they heard and obeyed his voice, and as he bade they builded.
And the child increased in strength by the Goddess's will.

Now when they had done their work, and rested from their labours, each
man started for his home, but yellow-haired Demeter, sitting there apart
from all the blessed Gods, abode, wasting away with desire for her deep-
bosomed daughter.  Then the most dread and terrible of years did the
Goddess bring for mortals upon the fruitful earth, nor did the earth send
up the seed, for Demeter of the goodly garland concealed it.  Many
crooked ploughs did the oxen drag through the furrows in vain, and much
white barley fell fruitless upon the land.  Now would the whole race of
mortal men have perished utterly from the stress of famine, and the Gods
that hold mansions in Olympus would have lost the share and renown of
gift and sacrifice, if Zeus had not conceived a counsel within his heart.

First he roused Iris of the golden wings to speed forth and call the fair-
tressed Demeter, the lovesome in beauty.  So spake Zeus, and Iris obeyed
Zeus, the son of Cronos, who hath dark clouds for his tabernacle, and
swiftly she sped adown the space between heaven and earth.  Then came she
to the citadel of fragrant Eleusis, and in the temple she found Demeter
clothed in dark raiment, and speaking winged words addressed her:
"Demeter, Father Zeus, whose counsels are imperishable, bids thee back
unto the tribes of the eternal Gods.  Come thou, then, lest the word of
Zeus be of no avail."  So spake she in her prayer, but the Goddess
yielded not.  Thereafter the Father sent forth all the blessed Gods, all
of the Immortals, and coming one by one they bade Demeter return, and
gave her many splendid gifts, and all honours that she might choose among
the immortal Gods.  But none availed to persuade by turning her mind and
her angry heart, so stubbornly she refused their sayings.  For she deemed
no more for ever to enter fragrant Olympus, and no more to allow the
earth to bear her fruit, until her eyes should behold her fair-faced
daughter.

But when far-seeing Zeus, the lord of the thunder-peal, had heard the
thing, he sent to Erebus the slayer of Argos, the God of the golden wand,
to win over Hades with soft words, and persuade him to bring up holy
Persephone into the light, and among the Gods, from forth the murky
gloom, that so her mother might behold her, and that her anger might
relent.  And Hermes disobeyed not, but straightway and speedily went
forth beneath the hollow places of the earth, leaving the home of
Olympus.  That King he found within his dwelling, sitting on a couch with
his chaste bedfellow, who sorely grieved for desire of her mother, that
still was cherishing a fell design against the ill deeds of the Gods.
Then the strong slayer of Argos drew near and spoke: "Hades of the dark
locks, thou Prince of men out-worn, Father Zeus bade me bring the dread
Persephone forth from Erebus among the Gods, that her mother may behold
her, and relent from her anger and terrible wrath against the Immortals,
for now she contrives a mighty deed, to destroy the feeble tribes of
earth-born men by withholding the seed under the earth.  Thereby the
honours of the Gods are minished, and fierce is her wrath, nor mingles
she with the Gods, but sits apart within the fragrant temple in the steep
citadel of Eleusis."

So spake he, and smiling were the brows of Aidoneus, Prince of the dead,
nor did he disobey the commands of King Zeus, as speedily he bade the
wise Persephone: "Go, Persephone, to thy dark-mantled mother, go with a
gentle spirit in thy breast, nor be thou beyond all other folk
disconsolate.  Verily I shall be no unseemly lord of thine among the
Immortals, I that am the brother of Father Zeus, and whilst thou art here
shalt thou be mistress over all that lives and moves, but among the
Immortals shalt thou have the greatest renown.  Upon them that wrong thee
shall vengeance be unceasing, upon them that solicit not thy power with
sacrifice, and pious deeds, and every acceptable gift."

So spake he, and wise Persephone was glad; and joyously and swiftly she
arose, but the God himself, stealthily looking around her, gave her sweet
pomegranate seed to eat, and this he did that she might not abide for
ever beside revered Demeter of the dark mantle. {204}  Then openly did
Aidoneus, the Prince of all, get ready the steeds beneath the golden
chariot, and she climbed up into the golden chariot, and beside her the
strong Slayer of Argos took reins and whip in hand, and drove forth from
the halls, and gladly sped the horses twain.  Speedily they devoured the
long way; nor sea, nor rivers, nor grassy glades, nor cliffs, could stay
the rush of the deathless horses; nay, far above them they cleft the deep
air in their course.  Before the fragrant temple he drove them, and
checked them where dwelt Demeter of the goodly garland, who, when she
beheld them, rushed forth like a Maenad down a dark mountain woodland.
{205}

[But Persephone on the other side rejoiced to see her mother dear, and
leaped to meet her; but the mother said, "Child, in Hades hast thou eaten
any food? for if thou hast not] then with me and thy father the son of
Cronos, who has dark clouds for his tabernacle, shalt thou ever dwell
honoured among all the Immortals.  But if thou hast tasted food, thou
must return again, and beneath the hollows of the earth must dwell in
Hades a third portion of the year; yet two parts of the year thou shalt
abide with me and the other Immortals.  When the earth blossoms with all
manner of fragrant flowers, then from beneath the murky gloom shalt thou
come again, a mighty marvel to Gods and to mortal men.  Now tell me by
what wile the strong host of many guests deceived thee? . . . "

Then fair Persephone answered her august mother: "Behold, I shall tell
thee all the truth without fail.  I leaped up for joy when boon Hermes,
the swift messenger, came from my father Cronides and the other heavenly
Gods, with the message that I was to return out of Erebus, that so thou
mightest behold me, and cease thine anger and dread wrath against the
Immortals.  Thereon Hades himself compelled me to taste of a sweet
pomegranate seed against my will.  And now I will tell thee how, through
the crafty device of Cronides my father, he ravished me, and bore me away
beneath the hollows of the earth.  All that thou askest I will tell thee.
We were all playing in the lovely meadows, Leucippe and Phaino, and
Electra, and Ianthe, and Melite, and Iache, and Rhodeia, and Callirhoe,
and Melobosis, and Tuche, and flower-faced Ocyroe, and Chraesis, and
Ianeira, and Acaste, and Admete, and Rhodope, and Plouto, and winsome
Calypso, and Styx, and Urania, and beautiful Galaxaure.  We were playing
there, and plucking beautiful blossoms with our hands; crocuses mingled,
and iris, and hyacinth, and roses, and lilies, a marvel to behold, and
narcissus, that the wide earth bare, a wile for my undoing.  Gladly was I
gathering them when the earth gaped beneath, and therefrom leaped the
mighty Prince, the host of many guests, and he bare me against my will
despite my grief beneath the earth, in his golden chariot; and shrilly
did I cry.  This all is true that I tell thee."

So the livelong day in oneness of heart did they cheer each other with
love, and their minds ceased from sorrow, and great gladness did either
win from other.  Then came to them Hekate of the fair wimple, and often
did she kiss the holy daughter of Demeter, and from that day was her
queenly comrade and handmaiden; but to them for a messenger did
far-seeing Zeus of the loud thunder-peal send fair-tressed Rhea to bring
dark-mantled Demeter among the Gods, with pledge of what honour she might
choose among the Immortals.  He vowed that her daughter, for the third
part of the revolving year, should dwell beneath the murky gloom, but for
the other two parts she should abide with her mother and the other gods.

Thus he spake, and the Goddess disobeyed not the commands of Zeus.
Swiftly she sped down from the peaks of Olympus, and came to fertile
Rarion; fertile of old, but now no longer fruitful; for fallow and
leafless it lay, and hidden was the white barley grain by the device of
fair-ankled Demeter.  None the less with the growing of the Spring the
land was to teem with tall ears of corn, and the rich furrows were to be
heavy with corn, and the corn to be bound in sheaves.  There first did
she land from the unharvested ether, and gladly the Goddesses looked on
each other, and rejoiced in heart, and thus first did Rhea of the fair
wimple speak to Demeter:

"Hither, child; for he calleth thee, far-seeing Zeus, the lord of the
deep thunder, to come among the Gods, and has promised thee such honours
as thou wilt, and hath decreed that thy child, for the third of the
rolling year, shall dwell beneath the murky gloom, but the other two
parts with her mother and the rest of the Immortals.  So doth he promise
that it shall be and thereto nods his head; but come, my child, obey, and
be not too unrelenting against the Son of Cronos, the lord of the dark
cloud.  And anon do thou increase the grain that bringeth life to men."

So spake she, and Demeter of the fair garland obeyed.  Speedily she sent
up the grain from the rich glebe, and the wide earth was heavy with
leaves and flowers: and she hastened, and showed the thing to the kings,
the dealers of doom; to Triptolemus and Diocles the charioteer, and
mighty Eumolpus, and Celeus the leader of the people; she showed them the
manner of her rites, and taught them her goodly mysteries, holy mysteries
which none may violate, or search into, or noise abroad, for the great
curse from the Gods restrains the voice.  Happy is he among deathly men
who hath beheld these things! and he that is uninitiate, and hath no lot
in them, hath never equal lot in death beneath the murky gloom.

Now when the Goddess had given instruction in all her rites, they went to
Olympus, to the gathering of the other Gods.  There the Goddesses dwell
beside Zeus the lord of the thunder, holy and revered are they.  Right
happy is he among mortal men whom they dearly love; speedily do they send
as a guest to his lofty hall Plutus, who giveth wealth to mortal men.  But
come thou that holdest the land of fragrant Eleusis, and sea-girt Paros,
and rocky Antron, come, Lady Deo!  Queen and giver of goodly gifts, and
bringer of the Seasons; come thou and thy daughter, beautiful Persephone,
and of your grace grant me goodly substance in requital of my song; but I
will mind me of thee, and of other minstrelsy.



V.  TO APHRODITE


I shall sing of the revered Aphrodite, the golden-crowned, the beautiful,
who hath for her portion the mountain crests of sea-girt Cyprus.  Thither
the strength of the west wind moistly blowing carried her amid soft foam
over the wave of the resounding sea.  Her did the golden-snooded Hours
gladly welcome, and clad her about in immortal raiment, and on her
deathless head set a well-wrought crown, fair and golden, and in her ears
put earrings of orichalcum and of precious gold.  Her delicate neck and
white bosom they adorned with chains of gold, wherewith are bedecked the
golden-snooded Hours themselves, when they come to the glad dance of the
Gods in the dwelling of the Father.  Anon when they had thus adorned her
in all goodliness they led her to the Immortals, who gave her greeting
when they beheld her, and welcomed her with their hands; and each God
prayed that he might lead her home to be his wedded wife, so much they
marvelled at the beauty of the fair-garlanded Cytherean.  Hail, thou of
the glancing eyes, thou sweet winsome Goddess, and grant that I bear off
the victory in this contest, and lend thou grace to my song, while I
shall both remember thee and another singing.



VI.  TO DIONYSUS


[Dionysus sailing in his sacred ship.  (Interior Design on a Kylix by
Exekias in Munich.): lang213.jpg]

Concerning Dionysus the son of renowned Semele shall I sing; how once he
appeared upon the shore of the sea unharvested, on a jutting headland, in
form like a man in the bloom of youth, with his beautiful dark hair
waving around him, and on his strong shoulders a purple robe.  Anon came
in sight certain men that were pirates; in a well-wrought ship sailing
swiftly on the dark seas: Tyrsenians were they, and Ill Fate was their
leader, for they beholding him nodded each to other, and swiftly leaped
forth, and hastily seized him, and set him aboard their ship rejoicing in
heart, for they deemed that he was the son of kings, the fosterlings of
Zeus, and they were minded to bind him with grievous bonds.  But him the
fetters held not, and the withes fell far from his hands and feet. {214}
There sat he smiling with his dark eyes, but the steersman saw it, and
spake aloud to his companions: "Fools, what God have ye taken and bound?
a strong God is he, our trim ship may not contain him.  Surely this is
Zeus, or Apollo of the Silver Bow, or Poseidon; for he is nowise like
mortal man, but like the Gods who have mansions in Olympus.  Nay, come
let us instantly release him upon the dark mainland, nor lay ye your
hands upon him, lest, being wroth, he rouse against us masterful winds
and rushing storm."

So spake he, but their captain rebuked him with a hateful word: "Fool,
look thou to the wind, and haul up the sail, and grip to all the gear,
but this fellow will be for men to meddle with.  Methinks he will come to
Egypt, or to Cyprus, or to the Hyperboreans, or further far; and at the
last he will tell us who his friends are, and concerning his wealth, and
his brethren, for the God has delivered him into our hands."

So spake he, and let raise the mast and hoist the mainsail, and the wind
filled the sail, and they made taut the ropes all round.  But anon
strange matters appeared to them: first there flowed through all the
swift black ship a sweet and fragrant wine, and the ambrosial fragrance
arose, and fear fell upon all the mariners that beheld it.  And
straightway a vine stretched hither and thither along the sail, hanging
with many a cluster, and dark ivy twined round the mast blossoming with
flowers, and gracious fruit and garlands grew on all the thole-pins; and
they that saw it bade the steersman drive straight to land.  Meanwhile
within the ship the God changed into the shape of a lion at the bow; and
loudly he roared, and in midship he made a shaggy bear: such marvels he
showed forth: there stood it raging, and on the deck glared the lion
terribly.  Then the men fled in terror to the stern, and there stood in
fear round the honest pilot.  But suddenly sprang forth the lion and
seized the captain, and the men all at once leaped overboard into the
strong sea, shunning dread doom, and there were changed into dolphins.
But the God took pity upon the steersman, and kept him, and gave him all
good fortune, and spake, saying, "Be of good courage, Sir, dear art thou
to me, and I am Dionysus of the noisy rites whom Cadmeian Semele bare to
the love of Zeus."  Hail, thou child of beautiful Semele, none that is
mindless of thee can fashion sweet minstrelsy.



VII.  TO ARES


Ares, thou that excellest in might, thou lord of the chariot of war, God
of the golden helm, thou mighty of heart, thou shield-bearer, thou safety
of cities, thou that smitest in mail; strong of hand and unwearied
valiant spearman, bulwark of Olympus, father of victory, champion of
Themis; thou tyrannous to them that oppose thee with force; thou leader
of just men, thou master of manlihood, thou that whirlest thy flaming
sphere among the courses of the seven stars of the sky, where thy fiery
steeds ever bear thee above the third orbit of heaven; do thou listen to
me, helper of mortals, Giver of the bright bloom of youth.  Shed thou
down a mild light from above upon this life of mine, and my martial
strength, so that I may be of avail to drive away bitter cowardice from
my head, and to curb the deceitful rush of my soul, and to restrain the
sharp stress of anger which spurs me on to take part in the dread din of
battle.  But give me heart, O blessed one, to abide in the painless
measures of peace, avoiding the battle-cry of foes and the compelling
fates of death.



VIII.  TO ARTEMIS


Sing thou of Artemis, Muse, the sister of the Far-darter; the archer
Maid, fellow-nursling with Apollo, who waters her steeds in the reedy
wells of Meles, then swiftly drives her golden chariot through Smyrna to
Claros of the many-clustered vines, where sits Apollo of the Silver Bow
awaiting the far-darting archer maid.  And hail thou thus, and hail to
all Goddesses in my song, but to thee first, and beginning from thee,
will I sing, and so shall pass on to another lay.



IX.  TO APHRODITE


I shall sing of Cytherea, the Cyprus-born, who gives sweet gifts to
mortals, and ever on her face is a winsome smile, and ever in her hand a
winsome blossom.  Hail to thee, Goddess, Queen of fair-set Salamis, and
of all Cyprus, and give to me song desirable, while I shall be mindful of
thee and of another song.



X.  TO ATHENE


Of Pallas Athene, the saviour of cities, I begin to sing; dread Goddess,
who with Ares takes keep of the works of war, and of falling cities, and
battles, and the battle din.  She it is that saveth the hosts as they go
and return from the fight.  Hail Goddess, and give to us happiness and
good fortune.



XI.  TO HERA


I sing of golden-throned Hera, whom Rhea bore, an immortal queen in
beauty pre-eminent, the sister and the bride of loud-thundering Zeus, the
lady renowned, whom all the Blessed throughout high Olympus honour and
revere no less than Zeus whose delight is the thunder.



XII.  TO DEMETER


Of fair-tressed Demeter the holy Goddess I begin to sing; of her and the
Maiden, the lovely Persephone.  Hail Goddess, and save this city and
inspire my song.



XIII.  TO THE MOTHER OF THE GODS


Sing for me, clear-voiced Muse, daughter of great Zeus, the mother of all
Gods and all mortals, who is glad in the sound of rattles and drums, and
in the noise of flutes, and in the cry of wolves and fiery-eyed lions,
and in the echoing hills, and the woodland haunts; even so hail to thee
and to Goddesses all in my song.



XIV.  TO HERACLES THE LION-HEART


Of Heracles the son of Zeus will I sing, mightiest of mortals, whom
Alcmena bore in Thebes of the fair dancing places, for she had lain in
the arms of Cronion, the lord of the dark clouds.  Of old the hero
wandered endlessly over land and sea, at the bidding of Eurystheus the
prince, and himself wrought many deeds of fateful might, and many he
endured; but now in the fair haunts of snowy Olympus he dwells in joy,
and hath white-ankled Hebe for his wife.  Hail prince, son of Zeus, and
give to us valour and good fortune.



XV.  TO ASCLEPIUS


Of the healer of diseases, Asclepius, I begin to sing, the son of Apollo,
whom fair Coronis bore in the Dotian plain, the daughter of King
Phlegyas; a great joy to men was her son, and the soother of evil pains.
Even so do thou hail, O Prince, I pray to thee in my song.



XVI.  TO THE DIOSCOURI


Of Castor and Polydeuces do thou sing,--shrill Muse, the Tyndaridae, sons
of Olympian Zeus, whom Lady Leda bore beneath the crests of Taygetus,
having been secretly conquered by the desire of Cronion of the dark
clouds.  Hail, ye sons of Tyndarus, ye cavaliers of swift steeds.



XVII.  TO HERMES


I sing of Cyllenian Hermes, slayer of Argus, prince of Cyllene and of
Arcadia rich in sheep, the boon messenger of the Immortals.  Him did Maia
bear, the modest daughter of Atlas, to the love of Zeus.  The company of
the blessed Gods she shunned, and dwelt in a shadowy cave where Cronion
was wont to lie with the fair-tressed nymph in the dark of night, while
sweet sleep possessed white-armed Hera, and no Immortals knew it, and no
deathly men.  Hail to thee, thou son of Zeus and Maia, with thee shall I
begin and pass on to another song.  Hail, Hermes, Giver of grace, thou
Guide, thou Giver of good things.



XVIII.  TO PAN


[Pan.  With Goat and Shepherd's Crook.  Terra cotta Statuette from
Tanagra, in the British Museum: lang230.jpg]

Tell me, Muse, concerning the dear son of Hermes, the goat-footed, the
twy-horned, the lover of the din of revel, who haunts the wooded dells
with dancing nymphs that tread the crests of the steep cliffs, calling
upon Pan the pastoral God of the long wild hair.  Lord is he of every
snowy crest and mountain peak and rocky path.  Hither and thither he goes
through the thick copses, sometimes being drawn to the still waters, and
sometimes faring through the lofty crags he climbs the highest peak
whence the flocks are seen below; ever he ranges over the high white
hills, and ever among the knolls he chases and slays the wild beasts, the
God, with keen eye, and at evening returns piping from the chase,
breathing sweet strains on the reeds.  In song that bird cannot excel him
which, among the leaves of the blossoming springtide, pours forth her
plaint and her honey-sweet song.  With him then the mountain nymphs, the
shrill singers, go wandering with light feet, and sing at the side of the
dark water of the well, while the echo moans along the mountain crest,
and the God leaps hither and thither, and goes into the midst, with many
a step of the dance.  On his back he wears the tawny hide of a lynx, and
his heart rejoices with shrill songs in the soft meadow where crocus and
fragrant hyacinth bloom all mingled amidst the grass.  They sing of the
blessed Gods and of high Olympus, and above all do they sing of boon
Hermes, how he is the fleet herald of all the Gods, and how he came to
many-fountained Arcadia, the mother of sheep, where is his Cyllenian
demesne, and there he, God as he was, shepherded the fleecy sheep, the
thrall of a mortal man; for soft desire had come upon him to wed the fair-
haired daughter of Dryops, and the glad nuptials he accomplished, and to
Hermes in the hall she bare a dear son.  From his birth he was a marvel
to behold, goat-footed, twy-horned, a loud speaker, a sweet laugher.  Then
the nurse leaped up and fled when she saw his wild face and bearded chin.
But him did boon Hermes straightway take in his hands and bear, and
gladly did he rejoice at heart.  Swiftly to the dwellings of the Gods
went he, bearing the babe hidden in the thick skins of mountain hares;
there sat he down by Zeus and the other Immortals, and showed his child,
and all the Immortals were glad at heart, and chiefly the Bacchic
Dionysus.  Pan they called the babe to name: because he had made glad the
hearts of all of them.  Hail then to thee, O Prince, I am thy suppliant
in song, and I shall be mindful of thee and of another lay.



XIX.  TO HEPHAESTUS


Sing, shrill Muse, of Hephaestus renowned in craft, who with grey-eyed
Athene taught goodly works to men on earth, even to men that before were
wont to dwell in mountain caves like beasts; but now, being instructed in
craft by the renowned craftsman Hephaestus, lightly the whole year
through they dwell happily in their own homes.  Be gracious, Hephaestus,
and grant me valour and fortune.



XX.  TO APOLLO


Phoebus, to thee the swan sings shrill to the beating of his wings, as he
lights on the bank of the whirling pools of the river Peneus; and to thee
with his shrill lyre does the sweet-voiced minstrel sing ever, both first
and last.  Even so hail thou, Prince, I beseech thee in my song.



XXI.  TO POSEIDON


Concerning Poseidon, a great God, I begin to sing: the shaker of the land
and of the sea unharvested; God of the deep who holdeth Helicon and wide
AEgae.  A double meed of honour have the Gods given thee, O Shaker of the
Earth, to be tamer of horses and saviour of ships.  Hail Prince, thou
Girdler of the Earth, thou dark-haired God, and with kindly heart, O
blessed one, do thou befriend the mariners.



XXII.  TO HIGHEST ZEUS


To Zeus the best of Gods will I sing; the best and the greatest, the far-
beholding lord who bringeth all to an end, who holdeth constant counsel
with Themis as she reclines on her couch.  Be gracious, far-beholding son
of Cronos, thou most glorious and greatest.



XXIII.  TO HESTIA


Hestia, that guardest the sacred house of the Prince, Apollo the
Far-darter, in goodly Pytho, ever doth the oil drop dank from thy locks.
Come thou to this house with a gracious heart, come with counselling
Zeus, and lend grace to my song.



XXIV.  TO THE MUSES AND APOLLO


From the Muse I shall begin and from Apollo and Zeus.  For it is from the
Muses and far-darting Apollo that minstrels and harpers are upon the
earth, but from Zeus come kings.  Fortunate is he whomsoever the Muses
love, and sweet flows his voice from his lips.  Hail, ye children of
Zeus, honour ye my lay, and anon I shall be mindful of you and of another
hymn.



XXV.  TO DIONYSUS


Of ivy-tressed uproarious Dionysus I begin to sing, the splendid son of
Zeus and renowned Semele.  Him did the fair-tressed nymphs foster,
receiving him from the king and father in their bosoms, and needfully
they nurtured him in the glens of Nyse.  By his father's will he waxed
strong in the fragrant cavern, being numbered among the Immortals.  Anon
when the Goddesses had bred him up to be the god of many a hymn, then
went he wandering in the woodland glades, draped with ivy and laurel, and
the nymphs followed with him where he led, and loud rang the wild
woodland.  Hail to thee, then, Dionysus of the clustered vine, and grant
to us to come gladly again to the season of vintaging, yea, and
afterwards for many a year to come.



XXVI.  TO ARTEMIS


I sing of Artemis of the Golden Distaff, Goddess of the loud chase, a
maiden revered, the slayer of stags, the archer, very sister of Apollo of
the golden blade.  She through the shadowy hills and the windy headlands
rejoicing in the chase draws her golden bow, sending forth shafts of
sorrow.  Then tremble the crests of the lofty mountains, and terribly the
dark woodland rings with din of beasts, and the earth shudders, and the
teeming sea.  Meanwhile she of the stout heart turns about on every side
slaying the race of wild beasts.  Anon when the Archer Huntress hath
taken her delight, and hath gladdened her heart, she slackens her bended
bow, and goes to the great hall of her dear Phoebus Apollo, to the rich
Delphian land; and arrays the lovely dance of Muses and Graces.  There
hangs she up her bended bow and her arrows, and all graciously clad about
she leads the dances, first in place, while the others utter their
immortal voice in hymns to fair-ankled Leto, how she bore such children
pre-eminent among the Immortals in counsel and in deed.  Hail, ye
children of Zeus and fair-tressed Leto, anon will I be mindful of you and
of another hymn.

[Apollo, Artemis and Leto in procession.  Marble relief in the Louvre:
lang241.jpg]



XXVII.  TO ATHENE


Of fairest Athene, renowned Goddess, I begin to sing, of the Grey-eyed,
the wise; her of the relentless heart, the maiden revered, the succour of
cities, the strong Tritogeneia.  Her did Zeus the counsellor himself
beget from his holy head, all armed for war in shining golden mail, while
in awe did the other Gods behold it.  Quickly did the Goddess leap from
the immortal head, and stood before Zeus, shaking her sharp spear, and
high Olympus trembled in dread beneath the strength of the grey-eyed
Maiden, while earth rang terribly around, and the sea was boiling with
dark waves, and suddenly brake forth the foam.  Yea, and the glorious son
of Hyperion checked for long his swift steeds, till the maiden took from
her immortal shoulders her divine armour, even Pallas Athene: and Zeus
the counsellor rejoiced.  Hail to thee, thou child of aegis-bearing Zeus,
anon shall I be mindful of thee and of another lay.



XXVIII.  TO HESTIA


Hestia, thou that in the lofty halls of all immortal Gods, and of all men
that go on earth, hast obtained an eternal place and the foremost honour,
splendid is thy glory and thy gift, for there is no banquet of mortals
without thee, none where, Hestia, they be not wont first and last to make
to thee oblation of sweet wine.  And do thou, O slayer of Argus, son of
Zeus and Maia, messenger of the blessed Gods, God of the golden wand,
Giver of all things good, do thou with Hestia dwell in the fair mansions,
dear each to other; with kindly heart befriend us in company with dear
and honoured Hestia.  [For both the twain, well skilled in all fair works
of earthly men, consort with wisdom and youth.]  Hail daughter of Cronos,
thou and Hermes of the golden wand, anon will I be mindful of you and of
another lay.



XXIX.  TO EARTH, THE MOTHER OF ALL


Concerning Earth, the mother of all, shall I sing, firm Earth, eldest of
Gods, that nourishes all things in the world; all things that fare on the
sacred land, all things in the sea, all flying things, all are fed out of
her store.  Through thee, revered Goddess, are men happy in their
children and fortunate in their harvest.  Thine it is to give or to take
life from mortal men.  Happy is he whom thou honourest with favouring
heart; to him all good things are present innumerable: his fertile field
is laden, his meadows are rich in cattle, his house filled with all good
things.  Such men rule righteously in cities of fair women, great wealth
and riches are theirs, their children grow glorious in fresh delights:
their maidens joyfully dance and sport through the soft meadow flowers in
floral revelry.  Such are those that thou honourest, holy Goddess, kindly
spirit.  Hail, Mother of the Gods, thou wife of starry Ouranos, and
freely in return for my ode give me sufficient livelihood.  Anon will I
be mindful of thee and of another lay.



XXX.  TO HELIOS


Begin, O Muse Calliope, to sing of Helios the child of Zeus, the splendid
Helios whom dark-eyed Euryphaessa bore to the son of Earth and starry
Heaven.  For Hyperion wedded Euryphaessa, his own sister, who bore him
goodly children, the rosy-armed Dawn, and fair-tressed Selene, and the
tireless Helios, like unto the Immortals, who from his chariot shines on
mortals and on deathless Gods, and dread is the glance of his eyes from
his golden helm, and bright rays shine forth from him splendidly, and
round his temples the shining locks flowing down from his head frame
round his far-seen face, and a goodly garment wrought delicately shines
about his body in the breath of the winds, and stallions speed beneath
him when he, charioting his horses and golden-yoked car, drives down
through heaven to ocean.  Hail, Prince, and of thy grace grant me
livelihood enough; beginning from thee I shall sing the race of heroes
half divine, whose deeds the Goddesses have revealed to mortals.



XXXI.  TO THE MOON


Ye Muses, sing of the fair-faced, wide-winged Moon; ye sweet-voiced
daughters of Zeus son of Cronos, accomplished in song!  The heavenly
gleam from her immortal head circles the earth, and all beauty arises
under her glowing light, and the lampless air beams from her golden
crown, and the rays dwell lingering when she has bathed her fair body in
the ocean stream, and clad her in shining raiment, divine Selene, yoking
her strong-necked glittering steeds.  Then forward with speed she drives
her deep-maned horses in the evening of the mid-month when her mighty orb
is full; then her beams are brightest in the sky as she waxes, a token
and a signal to mortal men.  With her once was Cronion wedded in love,
and she conceived, and brought forth Pandia the maiden, pre-eminent in
beauty among the immortal Gods.  Hail, Queen, white-armed Goddess, divine
Selene, gentle of heart and fair of tress.  Beginning from thee shall I
sing the renown of heroes half divine whose deeds do minstrels chant from
their charmed lips; these ministers of the Muses.



XXXII.  TO THE DIOSCOURI


Sing, fair-glancing Muses, of the sons of Zeus, the Tyndaridae, glorious
children of fair-ankled Leda, Castor the tamer of steeds and faultless
Polydeuces.  These, after wedlock with Cronion of the dark clouds, she
bore beneath the crests of Taygetus, that mighty hill, to be the saviours
of earthly men, and of swift ships when the wintry breezes rush along the
pitiless sea.  Then men from their ships call in prayer with sacrifice of
white lambs when they mount the vessel's deck.  But the strong wind and
the wave of the sea drive down their ship beneath the water; when
suddenly appear the sons of Zeus rushing through the air with tawny
wings, and straightway have they stilled the tempests of evil winds, and
have lulled the waves in the gulfs of the white salt sea: glad signs are
they to mariners, an ending of their labour: and men see it and are glad,
and cease from weary toil.  Hail ye, Tyndaridae, ye knights of swift
steeds, anon will I be mindful of you and of another lay.

[The Dioscuri coming to the feast of the Theoxenia.  From a Vase in the
British Museum (Sixth Century B.C.): lang252.jpg]



XXXIII.  TO DIONYSUS


Some say that Semele bare thee to Zeus the lord of thunder in Dracanon,
and some in windy Icarus, and some in Naxos, thou seed of Zeus,
Eiraphiotes; and others by the deep-swelling river Alpheius, and others,
O Prince, say that thou wert born in Thebes.  Falsely speak they all: for
the Father of Gods and men begat thee far away from men, while
white-armed Hera knew it not.  There is a hill called Nyse, a lofty hill,
flowering into woodland, far away from Phoenicia, near the streams of
AEgyptus. . . .

"And to thee will they raise many statues in the temples: as these thy
deeds are three, so men will sacrifice to thee hecatombs every three
years." {254}

So spake Zeus the counsellor, and nodded with his head.  Be gracious,
Eiraphiotes, thou wild lover, from thee, beginning and ending with thee,
we minstrels sing: in nowise is it possible for him who forgets thee to
be mindful of sacred song.  Hail to thee, Dionysus Eiraphiotes, with thy
mother Semele, whom men call Thyone.




FOOTNOTES


{4}  Baumeister, p. 94, and note on Hymn to Hermes, 51, citing Antigonus
Carystius.  See, too, Gemoll, _Die Homerischen Hymnen_, p. 105.

{13}  _Journal of Hellenic Society_, vol. xiv. pp. 1-29.  Mr. Verrall's
whole paper ought to be read, as a summary cannot be adequate.

{16a}  Henderson, "The Casket Letters," p. 67.

{16b}  Baumeister, "Hymni Homerici," 1860, p. 108 _et seq_.

{18}  _Die Homerischen Hymnen_, p. 116 (1886).

{23a}  _Journal Anthrop. Inst_., Feb. 1892, p. 290.

{23b}  (_Op. cit_., p. 296.)  See "Are Savage Gods Borrowed from
Missionaries?" (_Nineteenth Century_, January 1899).

{24}  Hartland, "Folk-Lore," ix. 4, 312; x. I, p. 51.

{30}  Winslow, 1622.

{34}  For authorities, see Mr Howitt in the _Journal of the
Anthropological Institute_, and my "Making of Religion."  Also _Folk
Lore_, December-March, 1898-99.

{37a}  Manning, "Notes on the Aborigines of New Holland."  Read before
Royal Society of New South Wales, 1882.  Notes taken down in 1845.
Compare Mrs. Langloh Parker, _More Australian Legendary Tales_, "The
Legend of the Flowers."

{37b}  Spencer and Gillen, "Natives of Central Australia," p. 651, _s.v_.

{39}  For the use of Hermes's tortoise-shell as a musical instrument
_without strings_, in early Anahuac, see Prof. Morse, in Appleton's
_Popular Science Monthly_, March 1899.

{41}  Gemoll.

{44}  "Golden Bough," i. 279.  Mannhardt, _Antike-Wald-und Feldkulte_, p.
274.

{45}  Howitt, _Journal Anthtop. Inst_., xvi. p. 54.

{46a}  The Kurnai hold this belief.

{46b}  Brough Smyth, vol. i. p. 426

{46c}  _Journal Anthrop. Inst_., xvi. pp. 330-331.

{59}  The most minute study of Lobeck's _Aglaophamus_ can tell us no more
than this; the curious may consult a useful short manual, _Eleusis, Ses
Mysteres, Ses Ruines, et son Musee_, by M. Demetrios Philios.  Athens,
1896.  M. Philios is the Director of the Eleusinian Excavations.

{61}  "Golden Bough," ii. 292.

{62}  "Golden Bough," ii. 369.

{64a}  "Golden Bough," ii. 44.

{64b}  Ibid., 46.

{65}  Mrs. Langloh Parker, "More Australian Legends," pp. 93-99.

{66}  The anthropomorphic view of the Genius of the grain as a woman
existed in Peru, as I have remarked in "Myth, Ritual, and Religion," i.
213.  See, too, "Golden Bough," i. p. 351; Mr. Frazer also notes the Corn
Mother of Germany, and the Harvest Maiden of Balquhidder.

{67}  "Golden Bough," p. 351, citing from Mannhardt a Spanish tract of
1649.

{68}  Howitt, on Mysteries of the Coast Murring (_Journal Anthrop.
Instit_., vol. xiv.).

{69}  De Smet, "Oregon Mission," p. 359.  Tanner's "Narrative" (1830),
pp. 192-193.

{72}  Pater, "Greek Studies," p. 90.

{74a}  "Africana," i. 130.

{74b}  _Journal Anthrop. Instit_. (1884), xiii. pp. 444, 450.

{74c}  _Op. cit_., xiv. pp. 310, 316.

{75}  "New South Wales," by Barren Field, pp. 69, 122 (1825).

{76a}  Aristophanes, _Ranae_, 445 _et seq_.; Origen. _c. Cels_., iii. 59;
Andocides, _Myst_., 31; Euripides, _Bacch_, 72 _et seq_.  See Wobbermin,
_Religionsgeschitliche Studien_, pp. 36-44.

{76b}  Wobbermin, _op. cit_., p. 38.

{77}  Wobbermin, _op. cit_., p. 34.

{78}  Hatch, "Hibbert Lectures," pp. 284, 285.

{82}  _Recherches sur l'Origine et la Nature des Mysteres d'Eleusis_.
Klinikseck.  Paris, 1895.

{84}  Herodotus, ii. 171.

{85a}  Spencer and Gillen, "Natives of Central Australia," p. 399.  The
myth is not very quotable.

{85b}  Foucart, p. 19, quoting _Philosophoumena_, v. 7.  M. Foucart, of
course, did not know the Arunta parallel.

{85c}  _Journal Anthrop. Inst_. (1884), pp. 194, 195, "Ngarego and Wolgal
Tribes of New South Wales."

{85d}  Ibid. (1885), p. 313.

{86a}  For ample information on this head see Mr. Clodd's "Tom-Tit-Tot,"
and my "Custom and Myth" ("Cupid, Psyche, and the Sun Frog").

{86b}  _Panegyr_., 28.

{87a}  Clem. Alex. _Protrept_., ii. 77 _et seq_.

{87b}  Harpocration, _s. v_. [Greek text].

{87c}  _Cf_. [Greek text].  Hippon, 90, and Theophrastus, Charact. 6, and
Synesius, 213, c.  Liddell and Scott, _s.v_. [Greek text].

{88a}  "Sand and Spinifex," 1899.

{88b}  Foucart, pp. 45, 46

{88c}  Hymn, Orph., 41, 5-9.

{89a}  Heriot, 1586.

{89b}  Foucart, pp. 56-59.

{90}  Foucart, p. 64.

{91a}  Basil Thomson, "The Kalou-Vu" (_Journal Anthrop. Inst_., May 1895,
pp. 349-356).  Mr. Thomson was struck by the Greek analogies, but he did
not know, or does not allude to, Plutarch and the Golden Scroll.

{91b}  Fragments, V. p. 9, Didot; Foucart, p. 56, note.

{95a}  Herodotus, Alilat, i. 131, iii. 8.

{95b}  "Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia," 1895, vol. i. pp. 91, 92.

{104}  Callim., H. Apoll. 30.

   [Greek verse]

{115}  The Greek is corrupt, especially in line 213.

{121}  This action was practised by the Zulus in divination, and,
curiously, by a Highlander of the last century, appealing to the dead
Lovat not to see him wronged.

{124}  A folk-etymology from [Greek text] = to rot.

{127}  A similar portent is of recent belief in Maori tradition.

{133}  See Essay on this Hymn.

{136}  In our illustration both the lyre with a tortoise shell for
sounding-board, and the cithara, with no such sounding-board, are
represented.  Is it possible that "the tuneful shell" was primarily used
_without_ chords, as an instrument for drumming upon?  The drum,
variously made, is the primitive musical instrument, and it is doubted
whether any stringed instrument existed among native American races.  But
drawings in ancient Aztec MSS. (as Mr. Morse has recently observed) show
the musician using a kind of drum made of a tortoise-shell, and some
students have (probably with too much fancy) recognised a figure with a
tortoise-shell fitted with chords, in Aztec MSS.  It is possible enough
that the early Greeks used the shell as a sort of drum, before some
inventor (Hermes, in the Hymn) added chords and developed a stringed
instrument.  _Cf_. p. 39.

{138}  Such sandals are used to hide their tracks by Avengers of Blood
among the tribes of Central Australia.

{140}  This piece of wood is that in which the other is twirled to make
fire by friction.

{141a}  Otherwise written and interpreted, "as even now the skins are
there," that is, are exhibited as relics.

{141b}  "Der Zweite Halbvers is mir absolut unverstandlich!"--_Gemoll_.

{144}  This is not likely to be the sense, but sense the text gives none.
Allen, _Journal of Hellenic Studies_, xvii. II.

{153}  "As if one walked with trees instead of feet."--_Allen_.

{156}  The passage which follows (409-414) is too corrupt to admit of any
but conjectural rendering.  Probably Apollo twisted bands, which fell off
Hermes, turned to growing willows, and made a bower over the kine.  See
Mr. Allen, _op. cit_.

{162a}  This passage is a playing field of conjecture; some taking [Greek
text] = Mediator, or Go-between: some as = pactum, "covenant."

{162b}  There seems to be a reference to the _caduceus_ of Hermes, which
some have compared to the forked Divining Rod.  The whole is corrupt and
obscure.  To myself it seems that, when he gave the lyre (463-495),
Hermes was hinting at his wish to receive in exchange the gift of
prophecy.  If so, these passages are all disjointed, and 521, with what
follows, should come after 495, where Hermes makes the gift of the lyre.

{164}  It appears from Philochorus that the prophetic lots were called
_thriae_.  They are then personified, as the prophetic Sisters, the
Thriae.  The white flour on their locks may be the grey hair of old age:
we know, however, a practice of divining with grain among an early
agricultural people, the Hurons.

{168}  Hestia, deity of the sacred hearth, is, in a sense, the Cinderella
of the Gods, the youngest daughter, tending the holy fire.  The legend of
her being youngest yet eldest daughter of Cronos may have some reference
to this position.  "The hearth-place shall belong to the youngest son or
daughter," in Kent.  See "Costumal of the Thirteenth Century," with much
learning on the subject, in Mr. Elton's "Origins of English History,"
especially p. 190.

{170}  Shielings are places of summer abode in pastoral regions.

{180}  Reading [Greek text], Mr. Edgar renders "no longer will my mouth
ope to tell," &c.

{194}  [Greek text] seems to answer to _fauteuil_, [Greek text] to [Greek
text].

{196}  M. Lefebure suggests to me that this is a trace of Phoenician
influence: compare Moloch's sacrifices of children, and "passing through
the fire."  Such rites, however, are frequent in Japan, Bulgaria, India,
Polynesia, and so on.  See "The Fire Walk" in my "Modern Mythology."

{204}  An universally diffused belief declares that whosoever tastes the
food of the dead may never return to earth.

{205}  The lines in brackets merely state the probable meaning of a
dilapidated passage.

{214}  This appears to answer to the difficult passage about the bonds of
Apollo falling from the limbs of Hermes (_Hermes_, 404, 405).  Loosing
spells were known to the Vikings, and the miracle occurs among those of
Jesuits persecuted under Queen Elizabeth.

{254}  There is a gap in the text.  Three deeds of Dionysus must have
been narrated, then follows the comment of Zeus.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOMERIC HYMNS***


******* This file should be named 16338.txt or 16338.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/3/3/16338



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

